ISBN 978-0-00-745165-4

9

11 1111111111111111111111
780007 451654

>

Agatha Christie (1890-1976) is known throughout the world as
the Queen of Crime. Her books have sold over a billion copies
in English with another billion in over 100 foreign languages.
She is the most widely published and translated author of all time
and in any language; only the Bible and Shakespeare have sold
more copies. She is the author of 80 crime novels and short story
collections, 19 plays, and six other novels. The Mousetrap, her
most famous play, was first staged in 1952 in London and is still
performed there - it is the longest-running play in history.
Agatha Christie's first novel was published in 1920. It featured
Hercule Poirot, the Belgian detective who has become the
most popular detective in crime fiction since Sherlock Holmes.
Collins has published Agatha Christie since 1926.
This series has been especially created for readers
worldwide whose first language is not English. Each story has
been shortened, and the vocabulary and grammar simplified
to make it accessible to readers with a good intermediate
knowledge of the language.
The following features are included after the story:
A List of characters to help the reader identify who is who, and
how they are connected to each other. Cultural notes to explain
historical and other references. A Glossary of words that some
readers may not be familiar with are explained. There is also a
Recording of the story.

Agatha Christie
Crooked House

Collins

Collins
HarperCollins Publishers
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London W6 8JB
www.collinselt.com

Contents
Story

1

Character list

99

C ultural notes

100

Glossary

104

Collins® is a registered trademark ofHarperCollins Publishers Limited.
This Colli11s English Readers edition published 2012
Reprint 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
First published in Great Britain by Collins 1949
AGATHA CHRISTIE™ Crooked House™
Copyright © 1949 Agatha Christie Limited. All rights reserved.
Copyright © 2012 Crooked House™ abridged edition
Agatha C hristie Limited. All rights reserved.
www.agathachristie.com
ISBN: 978-0-00-745165-4
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover by crushed.co.uk C HarperCollins/ Agatha Christie Ltd 2008
Typeset by Aptara in India.
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, St Ives pie.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without
the prior permission of the publishers.
T his book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of t rade
Ul" udu::rwist:, Lt: lc::ul, re-solJ, liirc<l uul u r otherwise:: dn.:ulatc::d without

the pubJjsher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published and without a similar condition including t his
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
HarperCollins does not warrant that www.collinselt.com or any other
website mentioned in this title will be provided uninterrupted, t hat
any website will be error free, rhat defects will be corrected, or that the
website or the server that makes it available are free of viruses or bugs.
For full terms and conditions please refer to the site terms provided on
the website.

Chapter 1

0
....,

There was a crooked man and he went a crooked mile.
He found a crooked sixpence beside a crooked stile.
He caught a crooked cat which caught a crooked mouse .
And they all lived together in a little crooked house.

.,u

-British nursery rhyme


I first met Sophia Leonides in Egypt towards the end of
World War II. She had quite an important job working for the
government, and when I worked with her I soon realized how
good at her job she was, though she was only twenty-two.
As well as being very good-looking, Sophia had a clear mind
and a delightful sense of humour. We became friends. She was
easy to talk to and we enjoyed our dinners and dances together
very much.
But it wasn't until I was ordered to go to East Asia at the end
of the war in Europe that I realized I loved Sophia and wanted
to marry her.
We were having dinner together when I realized this. It
wasn't a surprise - I think I'd known for a long time that I loved
her. I looked at Sophia and liked everything I saw. She had dark
hair and bright blue eyes, a small chin and a straight nose. She
looked very English.
Then suddenly I wondered if she really was as English as she
looked - after all, her surname didn't sound English. Although
we'd talked about many things, Sophia had never mentioned

Agatha Christie

Crooked House

her home or her family. I didn't know anything about her

'One brother, one sister, a mother, a father, an uncle, an aunt
by marriage, a grandfather, a great-aunt and a step-grandmother.'
'My goodness!' I exclaimed in surprise.
'Of course we don't normally all live together,' Sophia
laughed. ' It was because of the war - with the bombing it was
too dangerous to stay in London. But my grandfather takes care
of us. He's over eighty and very small, but he's so alive that
compared to him, everybody else seems rather boring.'
'He sounds interesting,' I said.
' H e is interesting. He's from Greece, and his name is Aristide
Leonides.' She added w ith a smile, 'And he's extremely rich . I
wonder if you'll like him.'
'Do you?' I asked.
'More than anyone in the world,' said Sophia .

background.
Sophia asked me what I was thinking about.
'You,' I replied truthfully. ' I may not see you for a few years,
Sophia, but when I get back to England, I'm going to :isk you to
m arry me.'
She sat there calmly.
'I'm not going to ask you now,' I continued , 'because you
might say no and I'd be very unhappy. And if you say yes, I don't
want to be engaged for years, or get married now and then leave
you straightaway. I want you to go home free and independent
and decide wh at you really want. But I wanted to let you know
how I - well - how I feel.'
'But you don't want to be too romantic?' murmured Sophia.
'Darling - don't you understand? I've tried not to say I love
you-'
She stopped me. 'I do understand, Charles. And I like your
funny way of doing things. You can come and see me when you
get back - if you still wa nt to -'
'Of course I'll want to,' I interrupted.
'You don't know that,' said Sophia. 'You don't know much
about me, do you?'
'No,' I admitted. ' I don't even know where in England you
live.'
' I live just outside London, at a place called Swinly Dean,' she
said. 'Jn a little crooked house .. .'
I must have looked surprised, because she explained why she
had used the last line of a nursery rhyme. 'My family,' she said.
'And they all Lived together in a Little crooked house. That's us. And
though the house isn't really little, it's definitely crooked!'
'So do you have a large family?' I asked.

Crooked House

Chapter 2
More than two years passed before I returned to England. Sophia
and I wrote to each other quite often. Our letters weren't love
letters - they were about ideas and thoughts - but I knew my
feelings for her were growing stronger and I believed she felt the
same.
I returned to England on a soft grey day in September and
immediately sent a telegram to Sophia.
'Just arrived back. Will you dine this evening Mario's Restaurant
nine o'clock. Charles.'

A couple of hours later-I was at my father's house in London,
reading the newspaper, when I saw the name 'Leonides' in the
Deaths column.
LEONIDES- On September 19th at Three Gables, Swinly
D ean, Aristide Leonides, much loved husband of Brenda
Leonides, passed away in his eighty-eighth year. Deeply missed.

There was another announcement imm~diately below.
LEONIDES - Passed away suddenly, at his house, Three
Gables, Swinly Dean, Aristide Leonides. Deeply missed by his
loving children and grandchildren.

thought it was strange that there were two announcements.
There must have been a mistake. I quickly sent Sophia a second
telegram.
'Just seen news of your grandfather's death. Very sorry. Let me know
when I can see you. Charles.'

A telegram from Sophia reached me at six o'clock.
'Will be at Mario's nine o'clock. Sophia.'

I was both nervous and excited at the thought of meeting
Sophia again. I hadn't seen her for so long that when she walked
through the door at Mario's it seemed completely unreal. We
h ad drinks and then sat down to dinner. I said I was sorry about
her grandfather, and we talked rather fast and were awkward
with each other. It wasn't just because we hadn't seen each other
for such a long time - I felt there was something definitely wrong
with Sophia herself Didn't she love me anymore? Had she met
someone else?
Somehow I didn't think that was the problem. I didn't know
what was wrong.
Then suddenly, as the waiter brought us our coffee, everything
went back to normal. Sophia and I were together again, and it
felt as if we had never been apa rt.
'Sophia,' I said.
'Charles!' she said immediately.
' Thank goodness that's over,' I said with relief. 'What was the
matter with us?'
'It was probably my fault,' said Sophia. 'I was stupid. But it's
all right now.'
We smiled at each other. 'Darling!' I said. 'How soon will
you marry me?'
Her smile disappeared. The problem, whatever it was, was back.
' I don't know,' she said. Tm not sure, C harles, that I can ever
marry you. Because - because of my grandfather's death.'
'Your grandfather's death? But what difference does that
make?'

Agatha Christie

Crooked H ouse

'Because I don't think he just died, Charles - I think he may
have been - killed .. .'
I stared at her. 'But - what a very strange idea! Why do you
think that?'
'It was the doctor - he wouldn't sign a death certificate, and
the police need to investigate officially why he died. They clearly
suspect that something is wrong.'
I didn't argue with her. Sophia was very intelligent, so I was
sure she was right. 'But even if something is wrong,' I said, ' how
does that affect you and me?'
'You work for the government - it might affect your job.
No - please don't say anything- I know it doesn't matter to you.
But it matters to me. I'm very proud - I want our marriage to be
a good thing for both of us. And it may be all right - so long as
the right person killed him.'
'What do you mean by "the right person", Sophia?'
' I know that's a horrible thing to say, but I'm trying to be
honest.' Before I could speak, she continued, 'I'm not going to
say any more, Charles. I've probably said too much already. But
we can't make any plans until we know w hy my grandfather
died.'
'At least tell me about it.'
She shook her head . ' No, Charles. I don't want to tell you
what I think. Instead, I want you to see me - and my family - for
yourself, from the outside.'
'And how will I do that?'
She looked at me with a strange light in her bright blue eyes.
'Your father will tell you,' she said.
I had told Sophia that my father was Assistant Commissioner
of Scotland Yard, the London police headquarters. I suddenly
felt cold. ' Is it such a serious case?' I asked.

'I think so. Do you see that man sitting by the door? He
followed me from Swinly Dean. I shouldn't have left the house,
but I wanted to see you, so I climbed out of the window.'
'Darling!'
'Well , never mind - we're here - together.' She pa.used and
then added, 'And there's no doubt that we love each other.'
'No doubt at all,' I said. 'You and I have survived a world war,
Sophia, so we can survive the sudden death of one old man. He
probably just died of old age.'
'If you knew my grandfather,' said Sophia, 'you would be
surprised that he died of anything!'

Crooked House

Chapter 3
I had always been interested in my father's police work - he was
often in charge of important police investigations - but now that
inten::st was personal.
My father had been out when I first arrived home, but this
time when I returned from seeing Sophia, he was sitting at his
desk. He jumped up when I came in. 'Charles! Well, well, it's
been a long time.'
We hadn't seen each other for five years. Perhaps our first
meeting after so long didn't seem very emotional , but my father
and I are very fond of each other.
Tm sorry I was out when you got here,' he said, ' but I've just
got a new case.'
'Aristide Leonides?' I asked.
' How did you know that, Charles?' he asked w ith a frown.
' I met Sophia Leonides in Egypt,' I explained, 'and I'm going
to marry her. She had dinner with me tonight - though she had
to climb out of the window to meet me.'
My father smiled. 'She seems very independent,' he said. 'So
you want to marry her? Well, it may be all right, if - if the right
person killed him.'
That was the second time that night I'd heard those words.
'So who is the right person?'
H e looked surprised. 'Didn't your girl tell you?'
'No. Sophia said she wanted me to see it all from the outside.
I don't know anything about her family, except there are a lot
of them.'
My father frowned and sat down. 'Very well, I'll tell you.
Aristide Leonides left Greece and arrived in England when he
was twenty-four.'

Just then the door opened and Chief Inspector Taverner came
in. We'd known each other for many years, and said hello warmly.
'Taverner is in charge of the case,' explained my father, 'so he
can correct me if I'm wrong. As I was saying, Leonides came to
London and then started a restaurant, which was very successful.
Soon he owned seven or eight restaurants, all making money, and
then he started a large business - Associated Foods - supplying
food all over the country.'
'Leonides had a natural ability for business and making
money,' said Taverner, 'though of course he was always a bit
dishonest - a bit crooked. He never actually broke the law, but
he came close to doing so.'
'H e doesn't sound a very attractive person,' I said.
'It's strange, but he was attractive,' said Taverner. ' He had
a strong personality, and though he was short and rather ugly,
women always fell in love with him.'
'He married a woman from a well-known family in the
country,' said my father. 'Her parents didn't like it, but she was
determined to marry him. And it was a very happy marriage,
I believe. Leonides built a rather ridiculous-looking house at
Swinly Dean and he and his wife lived there with their five
children. Then his wife died.'
'Leaving him with five children?' I asked.
'Yes, but there are only two children still left alive,' said my
father. 'Roger, the eldest son, who's married but has no children,
and Philip, who married an actress and has three children Sophia, Eustace and Josephine.'
'And now they all live together at the same house - Three
Gables?' I said.
'That's right. Roger moved there after his house was
bombed in the war, and Philip and his family have lived

Agatha Christie

Crooked H ouse

there for a few years. And there's an old aunt, Miss Edith de
Haviland, sister of the first Mrs Leonides. She alw ays hated
Aristide Leonides, but when h er sister died she came to look
after the children.'
'Well, that's a big family,' I said. 'Who do you think killed
Aristide Leonides?'
Taverner shook his head. ' I don't know,' he said. 'And we may
never know. But he was certainly murdered - poisoned. There
is one obvious suspect, but it will be very h ard to get enough
evidence.'
I looked at my father. ' In murder cases, C harles, it usually is
the obvious suspect,' he said. 'Aristide Leonides m arried again,
ten years ago, w hen he was seventy-seven . H e married a young
woman who wo rked in a tea shop.'
'And she's the obvious suspect?'
'Yes,' said Taverner. 'She's only thirty-four now and she's
very close friends w ith a young man in the house who teaches
the grandchildren .'
I looked at him thoughtfully. 'What was the poison?' I asked.
'The poison was called eserine,' replied Taverner. ' It was in
the old m an's eyedrops.'
'Leonides had diabetes,' added my father, 'and needed regular
injections of insulin, which comes from the pharmacy in small
bottles. U sing a syringe, the needle is pushed into the top of the
bottle and the insulin is taken up into the syringe for the injection.'
I guessed the next bit. 'And it w as eserine in the bottle, instead
of insulin?'
'Exactly,' said Taverner.
'And who gave him the injection?' I asked.
'His wife.'
I understood now what Sophia meant by the 'right person'.
'Do the family like the second M rs Leonides?' I asked .

'No,' replied Taverner. 'I don't think they speak much to each
other.'
It all seemed very clear. 'So what's the problem?' I asked
Taverner.
'If Mrs Leon ides did do it. why didn't she change the bottle
afterwards, so it was a real bottle of insulin? It would have been
easy - there were plenty of bottles around . If she'd done that, I
don't thi nk that the doctor would have noticed anything wron gnot much is k nown about eserine poisoning. The doctor only
realized it was eserine b ecause he checked the bottle in case the
insulin was the wrong strength.'
'So,' I said thoughtfu lly, 'Mrs Leonides was either very
stupid - or very clever. Perhaps she hopes you' ll think th at
no body could be that stupid. Are there any other suspects?'
'Anyone in the house could have done it,' said my father quietly.
'There was plenty of insulin in the bathroom cupboard where
anyone could take it. Someone could easily put eserine in one of
the bottles, knowing it would be used at some time in the future.'
'Does anyone have a strong motive?'
My father sighed. 'Aristide Leonides was extremely rich,' he
said, 'and tho ugh he gave his family plenty of money, perhaps
one of them wanted more.'
'So you think it was his wife,' I said. ' D oes her young man
have any money?'
' Laurence Brown, the teacher? No, he's very poor.'
' What do you think of Mrs Leonides?' I asked Taverner.
' I don't know,' he replied slowly. 'She's very quiet - you don't
know what she's thinking. And I imagine she likes an easy life she reminds me of a big, lazy cat. But we need evidence.'
Yes, I thought, we all wanted evidence that Mrs Leonides
had poisoned her husband - but no one was really sure that she
had done it.

Crooked House

Chapter 4
The next day I went to the Leonides' family house - Three
Gables - with Chief Inspector Taverner. I didn't really have any
official connection to the case, but I had once worked with the
police, and my father wanted to know all about the people in the
house - from the inside.
'This is the kind of crime that may never be solved,' my father
told me. 'Unless we can get some definite evidence, everyone
in the family will always be under suspicion - including your
Sophia. Why don't you ask her to help you?'
So here I was in Swinly Dean. Once we had driven past the
golf course, we soon came to the front of the house.
It was incredible! The house should have been called Eleven
Gables, not Three Gables. It looked like a traditional little country
house, but one that was the size of a castle. It had lots of crooked
gables and wood timbers - a little crooked house that had grown
up suddenly, like a mushroom in the night! It was a Greek
restaurant owner's idea of something English.
'It looks very strange, doesn't it?' said Taverner. 'It's actually
one big house, divided into three separate houses - and all of
them are very luxurious.'
Sophia came out of the front door, surprised - and not very
pleased - to see me.
'Sophia, I've got to talk to you,' I said. 'Where can we go?'
For a moment I thought she was going to refuse, but then she
led me across the grass and through a hedge to an untidy garden,
where we sat down on a wooden seat.
'Well? ' she said. She didn't sound very happy.
I told her what my father had said, and explained that the
police needed definite evidence - otherwise the crime might

never be solved. I asked if she would help me. Sophia listened
very carefully. 'Your father is right,' she said. 'That's just what
I've been thinking.'
After a pause, she said quietly, 'I have to know the truth! I
have to know what happened to my grandfather.' She sounded
almost desperate. 'I didn't tell you this last night, Charles, but
I'm afraid.'
'Afraid?' I repeated.
'Yes - afraid,' said Sophia. 'Everybody thinks that it was
Brenda - Grandfather's wife. I can say "Brenda probably did it' ',
but I don't really think she did. I don't think she would take such
a big risk.'
'What about the young teacher - Laurence Brown?'
'Laurence wouldn't have the courage,' said Sophia. 'Of
course I could be wrong, but Brenda - ' She shook her head.
'Brenda likes sitting around, eating sweets and having nice
clothes and j ewellery and reading cheap novels and going to the
cinema. And I know he was eighty-seven, but my grandfather
did make Brenda feel that she was an exciting and romantic
person.'
But what Sophia had said earlier disturbed me. 'Why did you
say that you were afraid?' I asked.
Sophia shivered. 'Because it's true,' she said in a quiet voice.
'I am afraid. We're a very strange family. We are all ruthless, in
different ways. That's what's so disturbing.'
My face must have shown that I didn't understand, because
Sophia continued, 'I'll try and explain. In Greece, Grandfather
once stabbed two men in a fight. He told me about it in quite
a relaxed w ay, as if it wasn't important. That's one kind of
ruthlessness. And then there was my grandmother. I don't really
remember her, but I've heard a lot about her. I think she was

Agatha Christie

ruthless in a different way - she was always so sure that she knew
the right thing to do, even in matters oflife and death.'
'That sounds a bit unlikely,' I said doubtfully.
'Yes, perhaps, but I'm always rather afraid of people like that,'
said Sophia. 'And then there's my own mother, who's an ::ictress.
She's a darling, but she only sees how things affect her. She doesn't
think of anyone else. That's rather frightening, sometimes. And
Clemency, Uncle Roger's wife - she's a scientist. She's ruthless
too, in a cold, unemotional way. Uncle Roger's the exact
opposite - he's the kindest and most lovable person in the world,
but he's got an extremely bad temper. Things make him so angry
that he hardly knows what he's doing. And there's Father-'
Sophia paused. 'Father,' she said slowly, 'is almost too well
controlled. You never know what he's thinking. He never shows
any emotion at all. It worries me a little.'
'My dear Sophia,' I said, 'you're getting very worried about
nothing. What you're really saying is that perhaps everybody is
capable-of murder.'
'I suppose that's true,' said Sophia. 'Even me.'
'Not you!'
'Oh yes, Charles, even me. I suppose I could murder
someone ... but only for something really important.'
I smiled, and so did Sophia.
'Perhaps I'm being stupid,' she said, 'but we have to find out
the truth about Grandfather's death. We have to. If only it really
was Brenda who killed him .. .'
Suddenly I felt rather sorry for Brenda Leonides.

Chapter 5
Just then we saw someone walking along the path towards
us. 'Aunt Edith,' said Sophia, as we stood up. 'This is Charles
Hayward. Charles, this is my great-aunt, Miss Edith de Haviland.'
Edith de Haviland was about seventy, with lots of untidy grey
hair and sharp, intelligent-looking eyes. 'I've heard about you,'
she said, shaking my hand. 'How is your father? I knew him
when he was a boy.'
Rather surprised, I said he was very well.
'Have you come to help us?' asked Miss .de Haviland. 'I do
hope so. There are police all over the house.' She turned to
Sophia. 'Nannie wants you, Sophia, about the fish for dinner.'
'Oh dear,' said Sophia. 'I'll go and sort it out.'
She walked quickly back towards the house, while Miss de
Haviland and I followed her more slowly.
'I don't know what we'd do without Nannie,' remarked Miss
de Haviland. 'She does so much work and has been here for so
long.'
She stopped and pulled viciously at a big weed in the garden.
'I hate bindweed!' she said. 'It gets tangled up with the other
plants and is impossible to get rid of.' She ground the weed
viciously under her foot.
'This is a bad situation, C harles Hayward,' she continued,
looking towards the house. 'I never liked Aristide Leonides - an
ugly little man - but now he's dead the house seems so - empty.
I've lived here over forty years, ever since my sister died and I
came to look after the children.'
'And you've stayed here all that time?' I murmured.
'Yes,' she said. 'I could have left, I suppose, when the children
grew up and married - but I loved the garden. And then when

Agatha Christie

Philip married an~ moved back here I helped look after his
children.'
'What does Philip Leonides do?' I asked curiously.
'He writes books,' replied Miss de Haviland, 'history
books. But nobody wants to read them. They don't earn him
any money - but then he doesn't need to earn money. Aristide
gave him over one hundred thousand pounds. And Roger is in
charge of his biggest company, Associated Foods. All of them are
financially independent. Sophia is regularly given a large amount
of money to live on, and there's money saved in the bank for the
other children.'
'So no one gains by his death? '
She looked at me strangely. 'Yes, they do,' she answered.
'They all get more money. But Aristide would have given it to
them if they'd asked for it.'
'Do you have any idea who poisoned him, Miss de Haviland?'
·-.. 'No, I don't,' she replied. 'It's upset me very much to think
that we have a poisoner in the house. I suppose the police will
think poor Brenda did it. She is rather stupid - perhaps she got
tired of waiting for Aristide to die. If it was her, it will be all
right - she isn't one of the family.'
'Do you have any other ideas?' I asked.
'What other ideas should I have?'
I won.Q.ered..She se~med to be intelligent. But as I looked at her
I thoug t of tit'i word Sophia had used - ruthless. I remembered
how Miss de Haviland had viciously ground the bindweed under
her foot. And just for a moment I wondered if Edith de Haviland
had poisoned Aristide Leonides herself.

Chapter 6
We went back to the house and through the large hall. At the
back, where there would normally be stairs, was a white wall
with a door in it.
'You get to Aristide's part of the house through that door,'
explained Miss de Haviland. 'Philip and Magda live in a different
part of the house, here on the bottom floor.'
We went through a door on the left into a large drawing
room. It had pale-blue walls, which were covered with many
photographs and pictures of actors and dancers. There was a lot
of heavy furniture and on the tables were large vases of flowers .
'Do you want to see Philip?' asked Miss de Haviland.
I had no idea, I thought - I'd only wanted to see Sophia.
Should I talk to her father? If I did, should I say that I was a
friend of Sophia's or that I was working with the police?
Miss de Haviland didn't give me time to say anything. 'We'll
go to the library,' she decided, and led me out of the drawing
room, along a corridor and through another door.
We entered a big, cold room full of books - not just on the
bookshelves, but also on the chairs, tables and even the floor. A
tall man of about fifty years old stood up as we came in. Philip
Leonides was very handsome, which surprised me, since people
said his father was so ugly. But this man had a perfect-looking
face, with a straight nose and fair hair that was just beginning to
turn grey.
'Philip,' said Edith de Haviland, 'this is C harles Hayward.'
'How do you do?' said Philip Leonides, shaking my hand. I
couldn't tell if he had ever heard of me - he certainly didn't seem
very interested.
'Are the police still here?' asked Miss de Haviland.

Agatha C hristie

Crooked H ouse

'I believe Chief Inspector Taverner is coming to talk to me
soon,' Philip replied. ' I don't know where he is now.'
Just then the door burst open and a woman came in. She had
big blue eyes and lots of-red hair, and was wearing a luxurious,
pink dressing gown. She was talking very quickly in a clear,
attractive voice. Somehow it seemed that three women - not just
one - had entered the room.
'Darling!' she said, 'I simply can't decide what to wear at the
inquest - something dark of course, though not black - perhaps
dark purple. How calm you are, Philip! How can you be so
calm? Don't you realize we can leave this awful house now, and
be free! Of course w e could never leave when your grandfather the poor old darling - was alive. He really did love us, but if
we'd left, that woman upstairs would have made sure she got the
house, the money - everything! But now, now we can produce
that new play- and this murder will give us lots of free publicity!'
So this was Magda Leonides, Sophia's mother. Tm looking
forward to talking to the Inspector,' she continued. 'He'll want
to know exactly how and when everything happened, and I'll tell
him all the little things I noticed and wondered about at the time - '
'Mother,' said Sophia, coming through the open door, 'you
mustn't tell the Inspector a lot oflies.'
'Sophia - darling . . .'
'And I know you're ready to give a most beautiful performance just as if you were acting in a play. But you've got it all wrong.'
Magda looked puzzled. 'What do you mean ?'
'You have to act it in a different way,' said Sophia. 'Don't
say much at all. Keep quiet and don't talk much, as if you're

'I've made you some breakfast,' added Sophia. 'It's in the
drawing room.'
'Oh good - I'm hungry,' said Magda, and quickly left the
room. Sophia started to follow her m other, then turned back
to say, 'Chiefinspector Taverner is here to see you, Father. You
don't mind if Charles stays, do you? '
I wasn't surprised w hen Philip Leonides looked confused, but
all he said was, 'Oh certainly - certainly,' in a rather uncertain
v01ce.
Chief Inspector Taverner came in. H e looked calm and
businesslike. As I sat down in the background, Miss de Haviland
said, 'Do you want me to stay, Chief Inspector?'
'N ot now, Miss de Haviland, but I do want to talk to you
later.'
'Of course. I'll be upstairs.' She went out, shutting the door
behind her.
' I won't disturb you for long,' said Taverner, ' but I can now
confirm that your father did not die a natural death. He was
poisoned by a drug called eserine.'
Philip did not show any emotion. 'He must have taken the
poison by accident,' he said . 'My father was nearly ninety and he
couldn't see very well.'
'So you think your father put the contents of his eyedrop
bottle into an insulin bottle,' said Taverner. 'D oes that seem
likely? '
Philip did not reply. His face still showed no emotion.
'We have found the empty eyedrop bottle,' continued the
C hief Inspector. 'There were no fingerprints on it, which is
strange - your father's fingerprints, at least, should have been
there. Now, Mr Leonides,' he continued, 'can you tell me w hat
you w ere doing on the day of your father's death?'

protecting the family.'
A pleased little smile showed on M agda's face. 'Yes,' she said
slowly. ' Yes. That's a good idea.'

Agatha Christie

Crooked H ouse

'Certainly,' replied Philip. 'I was here, in this room, all day except when I went to eat, of course.'
' Did you see your father at all?'
'I said good morning to him after breakfast.'
'Were you alone with him then?'
'My - er - stepmother, Brenda, was in the room.'
' Is your father's part of the house completely separate from
yours?' continued Taverner.
'Yes. The only way to get to it is through the door in the

'My father made us financially independent many years
ago,' Philip replied. ' H e gave my brother R oger his largest
company - Associated Foods - and gave me about one hundred
and fifty thousand pounds. My father didn't keep much money
for himself, but now he has made even more money than he had
before.' For the first time Philip smiled slightly.
'So you and your brother don't live in this house because of
financial problems?' asked Taverner.
'Certainly not. It's just easier for both of us, and my father
liked us to live here. I was very fond of my father,' added Philip.
' I came to Three Gables w ith my family in 1937 and my brother
R oger came in 1943, when his house in London was bombed.'
' I see,' said Taverner. 'Now, Mr Leonides, can you tell me
anything about your father's will and how he has left his money?'
'My father was not a secretive man,' said Philip. 'H e held a
meeting with all his family - and his lawyer, Mr Gaitskill - to tell
us about his will. My stepmother Brenda was left one hundred
thousand pounds, and the rest of his property was divided into
three parts - one for me, o ne for my brother Roger, and the
other was kept in the bank for his three grandchildren. I mean
my children, Sophia, Eustace and Josephine.'
'Did your father leave anything to the servants?'
'No,' answered Philip. ' instead, their pay increased each year
they stayed in his service.'
'And so you yourself don't need any more money, Mr
Leonides?'
'I have enough money, C hief Inspector,' said Philip coldly,
'and ifl needed more, my father would have given it to me. I had
no financial reason to want my father dead.'
'I'm sorry for asking,' said Taverner, 'but I need to know
all the facts. And now I have to ask you some rather personal

hall.'
' Is that door usually locked?'
' No, never,' replied Philip.
'So anyone could go freely between the different parts of the
house?'
'Yes, that's true.'
' How did you first hear of your father's death?' asked the
Inspector.
' My brother Roger - he lives on the floor above - came
rushing down to tell me that my father couldn't breathe and
seemed very ill.'
'What did you do?'
'I telephoned the doctor, but he was out, so I left an urgent
message. T hen I went upstairs. My father was clearly very ill,
and he died before the doctor came.' There was no emotion in
Philip's voice. It was a simple statement of fact.
'Where was the rest of your family?'
'My wife Magda was in London, but came home soon
afterwards. Sophia was also out, I believe, but my two younger
children, Eustace and Josephine, were at home.'
'And I'm afraid I have to ask you,' said Taverner, 'how your
father's death affects your financial position.'

Agatha Christie

questions about the relationship between your father and his
wife. Were they happy together?'
'Yes, as far as I know,' said Philip.
'Did you approve of your father's second marriage?'
'My approval was not asked,' Philip sa id, 'hut I thought the
marriage was unwise.'
' It must have been quite a shock to you,' said the Inspector.
Philip did not reply.
'Did you get on well with Mrs Leonides? ' Taverner continued.
'Yes,' answered Philip, 'though I don't see her very often.'
'What can you tell me about Mr Laurence Brown, your
children's teacher? '
'Not very much,' Philip said. 'My father employed him. His
references were good, and he is a good enough teacher.'
' He lives in your father's part of the house, not here?'
'There was more room there.'
' Have you ever noticed any signs of a close relationship
between Laurence Brown and your stepmother?' was Taverner's
final question.
'No, I have not,' Philip replied.
Chief Inspector Taverner got up. 'Thank you very much for
your help, Mr Leonides.'
I followed him out of the room. 'My goodness, C harles,' said
Taverner, as we stood in the corridor, ' he's a cold man! '

Chapter 7
'And now let's talk to his wife M agda, the actress,' said Taverner.
'The name she uses on stage is Magda West.'
'I've heard her name,' I said. 'Is she a good actress?'
She has starred once or twice in the big London theatres,'
said Taverner, 'but she's never become famous - perhaps because
she doesn't need to earn her living. If she wants to play a certain
part, she sometimes finances the whole play herself.'
Sophia came out of the drawing room. 'My mother is in here,
Chief Inspector.'
I followed Taverner into the big drawing room. For a
moment I didn't recognize the woman who sat on the sofa - she
was so different from the emotional woman in the luxurious
pink dressing gown I had seen earlier. Magda's red hair was now
arranged in an old-fashioned style on the top of her head, and
she wore a neat grey coat and skirt and a pale shirt.
'Please sit down, Inspector,' she said in a calm, quiet voice.
'How can I help you?'
'Thank you,' said Taverner. 'Can I ask where you were at the
time of your father-in-law's death?'
'l was driving home from London,' Magda said. 'I'd had
lunch with a friend and then gone shopping. W hen I got here,
everything was in confusion. My father-in-law had become ill
and was - dead.' Her voice shook just a little.
'Were you fond of your father-in-law?' asked the Inspector.
'We were all fond of h im,' replied Magda. 'He was very good
to us.'
'Do you get on well with Mrs Leonides?'
'We don't see very much of Brenda. We don't have much in
common.'

Agatha C hristie

'Was Mrs Leonides happy with her husband?'
'Oh, I think so,' replied Magda quietly.
'She is very friendly with Laurence Brown, I believe?'
Magda's body became stiff and she looked sadly at Taverner.
'Brenda,' she said with dignity, 'is friendly to everyone.'
'Do you like Laurence Brown?'
'He's very quiet - you don't really notice he's there.'
Taverner tried to shock her. 'Do you think Brenda Leonides
and Laurence Brown were having a love affair?'
Magda stood up theatrically, as if she was on stage. 'I have no
idea, Inspector,' she said, 'and that is not a question you should
ask me - Brenda was my father-in- law's wife.'
I felt like clapping her performance.
Taverner also stood up. 'Thank you, Mrs Leonides,' he said.
I followed Taverner out to the door to the stairs . Tm just
going up to see Roger, the elder brother,' he explained.
'Can you help me, Taverner? ' I said. 'If anyone asks me what
I'm doing here, what should I say?'
Taverner smiled. 'Has anyone asked you?'
'Well - no,' I admitted.
' If no one has asked you, then don't explain or say anything,'
he said simply. 'Everyone is too worried to ask you questions.
Hmm,' he continued , 'this door isn't locked - none of them are
in this house. You realize, of course, that all my questions about
who was in the house that day don't matter at all?'
'Then why ask?' I said.
' Because I want to hear them talk,' Taverner said. 'I might
learn something . Everybod y in the house had the means and the
opportuni ty to kill the old man - what I want is a motive.' H e
knocked on the door at the top of the stairs.
It was opened by a big, tall man, with strong shoulders, dark
hair, and an ugly but pleasant face. 'You must be Chieflnsp ector

Crooked House

Taverner,' he said. Tm Roger Leonides. Do come into the sitting
room.' He led us into a completely white room, which was light
and airy and had very little furniture. It was very different to
Magda's crowded room downstairs.
'I'll go and get my wife, C lemency,' said Roger. 'Oh, you're
here, darling. I must get some cigarettes, if you don't mind.' H e
bumped into a table and went clumsily out of the room.
I looked at C lemency Leonides. She was about fifty, with
short grey hair that suited her intelligent and sensitive face. Her
eyes were grey and she wore a simple, red wool dress that fitted
her slim figure perfectly. She h ad a strong personality, and I
understoo d at once why Sophia had said she was ruthless. The
room was cold and I shivered a little.
'Please sit down, C hief Inspector,' said C lemency in a quiet
voice. 'Is there any news?'
'Your father-in- law died of eserine poisoning,' replied
Taverner. 'It was definitely murder.'
'This will upset my husband very much,' said Clemency .
'H e's a very emotional person and he loved his father dearly.'
'Did you get on well with your father-in-law, Mrs Leonides? '
'I got on quite well with him,' she said quietly, ' but I didn't
like him very much. I didn't like the way he did business.'
'What about Brenda Leonides - do you think she was having
a love affair with Laurence Brown? '
'I don't think so,' said C lemency, 'but I don't really know.'
She didn't sound at all interested.
Roger Leonides came hurrying back. 'Well, C hief Inspector?
Is there any news?'
'Your father died of eserine poisoning,' explained Taverner.
'My God !' exclaimed Roger. 'So that woman murdered him !
She couldn't wait for him to die!'
'Why do you think that?' Taverner asked.

Crooked House

Agatha C hristie

'Who else could it be?' said Roger, walking quickly up and
down the room, pulling his hair. 'I've never trusted Brenda never liked her! None of us did. Why did Father marry her? At
his age? It was madness - madness! My father was an amazing
man, Chief Inspector. H e did everythin g for me, and I - I failed
him.' He sat down heavily.
'Now, Roger, please don't get upset,' said his wife quietly.
'Chieflns pector Taverner wants our help.'
'I'd like to strangle that woman with my own hands,' said
Roger angrily. 'Yes, I'd strangle her! If she were here . . .' H e was
shaking with anger.
'Roger!' said Clemency sharply.
'Sorry, dearest,' said Roger, calming down. 'I do apologize. I please excuse me -' he said to us, and went out of the room again.
'He wouldn't really hurt anyone,' said Clemency with a slight
smile.
Taverner politely began to ask his routine questions, which
Clemency Leonides answered clearly. Roger had been in London
on the day of his father's death, working at the head office of
Associated Foods. He had returned in the afternoon and had
spent some time with his father. She herself had been at work in
London, and had returned to the house just before six o'clock.
'Did you see your father-in- law on the day of his death?'
asked Taverner.
'No,' replied C lemency. 'I saw him the day before, after dinner,
but not on the day he died. I did go to his part of the house to get
something for Roger, but I didn't disturb the old man.'
'When did you hear that he was ill?'
'Brenda came rushing over, just after half-past six.'
I knew that these questions weren't important , but they gave
Inspector Taverner the chance to look closely at the woman who
answered them. Then Taverner asked if he could look round

their part of the house. Clemency was surprised, but showed us
the plain simple rooms, which were all very tidy and neat. Then
she opened another door, saying, 'Roger will be in here - it's his
own sp ecial room.'
'Come in,' said Roger, as his wife left us. His room was very
different to those in the rest of the house. It was a personal room,
full of papers, photograp hs and big chairs - and although it was
untidy, it was pleasant and comfortable.
'I'm sorry about my behaviour earlier,' said Roger. ' I get
very emotional at times.' H e looked round to make sure that
C lemency was not w ith us. 'My wife has been wonderful,' he
said. ' I admire her so much. She's had such a hard life - she
looked after her first husband, who died - and I was so glad
when she agreed to marry me so I could take care of her. I'm so
lucky - I'd do anything for her.'
Again Taverner politely began to ask his questions. 'When
did you first know that your father was ill? '
'Brenda rushed over to tell me. I' d left him only half an hour
before, and he was all right then. I rushed over to see him - he
couldn't breathe properly - and then I ran down to Philip, who
phoned for the doctor. I - we couldn't do anything to help.'
When Taverner and I left Roger's part of the house, the
C hief Inspector said, 'He's very different to his brother, isn't he?'
I agreed with him.
'And the women they've married are very different, too,'
Taverner added.
C lctmency and M agda were indeed very different. And yet I
thought that both married couples seemed happy together.
'But I don't think Roger is a poisoner,' continued Taverner,
'though his wife might be. N o, I think it's much more likely to
be Brenda Leonides - though I don't know if we'll ever get any
evidence.'

Crooked House

Chapter 8
Now we went to Aristide Leonides' part of the house, where a
servant opened the door and led us into a big drawing room.
Althoug h it was the same size as Philip and Magda's drawing
room, this room looked very different. It had bright sofas and
luxuriou s curtains, and on the wall was a painting of a little old
man. He had sharp, but kind-loo king dark eyes, and crooked
shoulders. He looked powerfu l and full oflife.
'That's Aristide Leonides,' said Taverner. 'He certainly had a
strong personality.'
'Yes,' I agreed, looking at the painting and the little man's
lively, dark eyes. Now I understo od why Edith de Haviland
thought that the house seemed empty without him.
'There's a painting of his first wife over there,' said Taverner.
I looked at the picture of a typical English country lady. Her
face was handsom e, but rather dull and lifeless - not like her
husband's face.
Just then the door opened and Aristide Leonides ' second wife
came into the room.
Brenda Leonide s was quite pretty. She had brown hair, and
was wearing a black dress and lots of expensive jeweller y. She
moved easily and lazi ly, like a cat. I noticed that though she wore
makeup, she had obviously been crying. I also noticed that she
looked frightene d.
'Good morning , Mrs Leonides,' said Taverner. 'I'm sorry to
disturb you again. You do understa nd, don't you, that you can
have your lawyer here if you want?'
I wondere d if she understo od what these words meant.
Apparently not.

' I don't like Mr Gaitskill,' said Brenda Leonides, sitting down
on the sofa. 'I don't want him here.'
'We'll start, then,' said Taverner.
'Have you found out anything ?' she asked, her hands twisting
nervously.
'Yes,' said Taverner. 'Your husband definitely died from
eserine poisonin g.'
'You mean those eyedrops killed him?'
'That's right. You iajected Mr Leonides with eserine, not insulin.'
'But I didn't know that! ' exclaime d Brenda. 'I didn't have
anything to do with it.'
'Then somebod y must have deliberately replaced the insulin
with the eyedrops.'
'It must have been an accident - or one of the servants,' said
Brenda.
'We've interview ed the servants,' said Taverner, 'and we don't
suspect any of them. Have you any other ideas, Mrs Leonide s?"
She stared at him. 'I've no idea at all,' she said.
'You said you were at the cinema that afternoo n?'
'Yes - I came in at half-past six. I - I - gave my husband his
iajection , as usual, and then he - he became ill. I was terrified - I
rushed to find Roger - I've told you all this before.'
'I'm sorry, Mrs Leonides ,' said Taverner. 'Now can I speak to
Mr Brown?'
'To Laurence? Why? He doesn't know anything about it.'
' I still want to speak to him.'
She stared at the Chief Inspecto r suspiciously. 'Laurenc e is
in the schoolro om, teaching Eustace.'
Taverner and I left the room and walked down the corridor to
a large room overlook ing the garden. Inside a fair-hair ed young

Agatha Christie

C rooked House

man of about thirty was sitting at a table with a handsome dark
boy of sixteen .
They looked up as we came in. Sophia's brother Eustace
looked at me, while Laurence Brown stared at Chief Inspector
Taverner. 'Oh - er - good morning, Inspector,' he said, looking

'We did not!' insisted the young man. ' I know what you're
thinking, but you're wrong! Mrs Leonides was always very kind
to me and I respect her - but nothing more! And I - I wouldn't
kill anybody - I'm very sensitive, and I'm not very strong. I object
to killing - I wou ldn't fight in the war. They let me teach instead,
and I've done my best here with Eustace, and Josephine - she's
a very intelligent child, but difficult. Everybody has been very
kind to me - and now this awful thing happens. And you suspect
me - me - of murder! '
Chieflnspector Taverner looked at him closely. 'I haven't said
that,' he remarked.
'But you think so! They all think so! They look at me. I - I
can't go on talking to you. I'm not well.' He hurried out of the
room.
'He's really scared,' said Taverner, ' but that doesn't prove
anything. Is he a murderer? '
' I don't know if he'd have the courage,' I said.
'This m urder didn't need courage,' said the C hief Inspector.
'All he had to do was switch two bottles. Then he could marry
a very rich woman. It's a shame that the servants haven't seen
anything going on between them.'
He sighed. 'But it's all theory,' he admitted. 'It's more likely
to be the wife, Brenda ... though why didn't she throw away the
insulin bottle - or wash it?'
H e looked at me. 'Go back and talk to her, C harles. I'd like
to know what you think .'

very frightened.
'Good morning.' Taverner was abrupt. 'Can I have a word
w ith you? '
'Yes, of course,' said Laurence Brown.
Eustace stood up. 'Do you want me to go away? ' he said. His
voice was pleasant but slightly arrogant.
'We - we can continue your lesson later,' said his teacher, and
Eustace walked stiffly out through the door and shut it behind
him.
'Well, Mr Brown,' said Taverner. ' I can confirm that Mr
Leonides died of eserine poisoning, which was injected instead
of insulin.'
' I can't believe it - it's incredible.'
'Would you like your lawyer here?' asked Taverner.
'I don't have a lawyer,' said Laurence Brown, 'and I don't
want one. I have nothing to hide - I'm innocent - innocent!'
' I have not suggested anything else.' Taverner paused. 'Mrs
Leonides was a lot younger than her husband, wasn't she? '
'I - I suppose so - I mean, well, yes.'
'She must have felt lonely sometimes?'
Laurence Brow n did not answer.
'She must have liked having a friend near her own age living
here.'
' I - no, no t at all - I mean - I don't know.'
'It would be natural that you two should have become more
than friends.'

Crooked House

Chapter 9
I found Brenda Leonides sitting exactly where we had left her. 'Is
Inspector Taverner coming back?' she asked abruptly.
'Not now,' I replied.
'Who are you?'
At last someone had asked me that question. 'I'm with the
police,' I said, 'but I'm also a friend of the family.'
'The family - I hate them all!' Brenda looked frightened and
angry. 'They've always been horrible to me! Why shouldn't I
marry their father? What did it m atter to them? He'd already
given them lots of money. And I was very fond of him.'
'I see,' I said.
' It's true,' Brenda said. ' I was sick of men. I wanted a home
and someone to be nice to me. Aristide made me laugh - and he
was clever. I'm sorry he's dead.'
She sat back on the sofa. 'I've been safe and happy here,' she
said. 'Aristide gave me lovely things.' She looked at the expensive
ring on her hand with a satisfied smile. 'And I was very nice to
him. Do you know how we met?'
Brenda didn't wait for me to answer. 'I was working in a tea
shop and brought him his lunch. I was crying and he asked me
to sit down. I said I couldn't - I'd lose my job. "No, you won't,"
he said, "I own this place." He was a little old man but he had
power. I told him what was wrong. I was a respectable girl but I
was - I was in trouble. I was going to have a baby.'
She looked at me. 'Aristide was wonderful,' she said. 'We
were married at once. T hen I found out he was very rich - it was
like a fairy story.'
Brenda smiled lazily, like a cat. 'And I'd made a mistake - I
wasn't pregnant. I was a good wife to Aristide and made him

happy. But his family - they were always there, living on his
money. They were horrible to me. Roger hates me and Philip
never speaks to me. And now they think I murdered their father,
but I didn't - I didn't!'
I felt very sorry for her - she was alone and helpless, and all
the Leonides family wanted to believe she was a murderer.
'And if they don't think that I did it, they think that Laurence
did,' Brenda continued. 'He's so sensitive, and I've just tried to be
kind to him. He h as to teach those horrible children. Eustace is
always rude to him - he's been ill, you know, and can't go back
to school yet - but that's no reason to be rude. And Josephine well, sometimes I think there's something wrong with Josephine.
She likes to sneak and ~ on people.'
I didn't really want to hear about the children just now.
'What chance do Laurence and I have against the rest of the
family?' Brenda asked me. 'It could have been one of them who
killed Aristide.'
'They don't seem to have a motive,' I said.
'But I don't have a motive,' Brenda said, 'and nor does
Laurence.'
'They might think,' I said uncomfortably, 'that you and er - Laurence - are in love w ith each other and want to get
married.'
She sat up straight. 'That's a wicked thing to say! And it's not
true! I've been nice to Laurence but we're just friends, that's all.
You do believe me, don't you ?'
I did believe her. I believed that she and Laurence were just
friends - though of course it was possible that she was in love
with him without knowing it.
I was thinking about all this when I went downstairs to find
Sophia, who was helping Nannie with lunch. She led me into

Agatha Christie

Crooked House

the empty drawing room. 'Well,' she said, 'what did you think
of Brenda?'
'I felt sorry for her.'
Sophia looked amused. 'I see,' she said. 'Yes, Brenda does
seem to get on well with men.'
I was annoyed. 'I can see her point of view, that's all,' I said.
'Has anyone in your family ever been nice to her?' ·
'No, we haven't been nice to her,' said Sophia. 'Why should
we be? You've seen Brenda's point of view, now see things from
my side. I don't like the kind of woman who pretends she's going
to have a baby so she can marry a rich old man.'
'Was she pretending about the baby?' I asked.
' I don't know, but I think so,' said Sophia. 'But she didn't fool
Grandfather - he knew what he was doing and he got what he
wanted. From his point of view the marriage was a complete
success.'
'Was employing Laurence Brown as a teacher a success too?'
I asked ironically.
Sophia frowned. 'Perhaps Grandfather wanted to keep
Brenda happy and amused, by giving her a mild romance in her
life with someone harmless like Laurence. I'm sure he didn't
think it would end in his own murder. And that,' added Sophia,
speaking with certainty, 'is why I don't really believe that Brenda
or Laurence did it - because Grandfather would have known.'
'That sounds very unlikely,' I said doubtfully.
'But you didn't know Grandfather,' she answered. ' Is Laurence
very frightened?'
'Yes, he is,' I said. 'I don't understand how any woman could
fall in love with a weak man like him.'
'Don't you, Charles? Actually Laurence is very attractive.
And you seemed to like Brenda very much.'

'Don't be silly,' I said. 'She's not even pretty.'
'No, but she made you feel sorry for her,' said Sophia.
'Brenda's not very pretty, and she's not very clever, but she does
make trouble. She's made trouble, already, between you and me.'
'Sophia!' I exclaimed as she moved towards the door.
'Forget it, Charles. I must go to the kitchen and help Nannie
with lunch.'
I remembered something that had puzzled me. 'Sophia, why
do you have to do that? Why don't you have more servants in a
house this size?'
'Sometimes we do have more servants,' she replied, 'but then
Mother upsets them and they leave. Apart from Nannie, we
don't have any permanent servants at the moment. So I have to
help as much as I can .'
Sophia went off to the kitchen and I sat down in one of the
big chairs to think. Upstairs I had seen Brenda's side of the story,
and now I had seen Sophia's side. I realized that it was quite
natural for Sophia and her family to dislike Brenda so much.
But I saw something that they didn't see. They were rich and
powerful, with a safe place in society. They didn't know what it
was like to be poor and helpless. Brenda Leonides had wanted
pretty things and a safe home - and in exchange she had made
her old husband happy. I felt sorry for her. I could see both her
side of the story and Sophia's side - but who was right?
I hadn't slept well the night before and had got up early that
morning. Now, in the warm room and the comfortable chair,
my body relaxed and my eyes closed - and I went to sleep.

Crooked House

Chapter 10
I woke up so slowly that at first I didn't realize that I'd been
sleeping.
In front of me I saw a human face - a round face with a big
forehead, combed-back hair and small, black eyes. The face was
attached to a small thin body, and was looking at me closely.
'Hello,' said the face. Tm Josephine.'
I had already guessed that this was Sophia's sister. Josephine
was an ugly little girl, about eleven or twelve years old, who
looked very like her grandfather.
'You're Sophia's young man,' said Josephine. 'But why did
you come here with Chieflnspector Taverner?'
' He's my friend,' I told her.
' Is he? I don't like him. I won't tell him things.'
'What sort of things?'
'The things I know. I know a lot of things. I like knowing
things.'
She sat down and continued to look at me closely.
' Grandfather's been murdered. Did you know?'
'Ye.s,' I said. 'I knew.'
'He was poisoned. With es-er-ine.' ·She said the word very
carefully. 'It's interesting, isn't it?'
'I suppose it is.'
'Eustace and I are very interested. We like detective stories.
I'm being a detective now. I'm collecting clues.'
She was rather a strange child, .I thought.
'I think there'll be a lot of changes here now,' Josephine told
me. 'We'll go and live in a house in London. Mother will be very
pleased. Father couldn't afford it before. He lost lots of money on

one of Mother's plays. Grandfather wouldn't pay for it. He said it
would be a failure, but Mother didn't listen.'
Tm sorry the play was a failure,' I said.
'Yes, Mother was very upset. The things they said in the
newspapers were so bad that she cried all day and threw µer
breakfast at one of the servants, who left. It was rather fun.'
'Are you sorry your grandfather is dead? ' I asked.
'Not really. I didn't like him much. H e stopped me learning
to be a ballet dancer.'
'Did you want to learn ballet dancing?'
'Yes, and Mother and Father didn't mind, but Grandfather
said I'd be no good.'
She stood up and danced a few steps round the chair. 'I suppose
the house will be sold now. Unless Brenda goes on living here.
And I suppose Uncle Roger and Aunt Clemency won't be going
away now.'
'Were they going away?' I asked curiously.
'Yes. They were going on Tuesday,' said Josephine. 'Abroad
somewhere. It was a secret. They weren't going to tell anyone
until after they'd gone. They were going to leave a note behind
for Grandfather.'
'Josephine, do you know why your Uncle Roger was going
away?' I said.
She looked at me~- 'It was something to do with Uncle
Roger's office in London. I think - but I'm not sure - that he'd
"embezzled" something. That means stealing money.'
'Why do you think that?'
Josephine came so near that I could feel her breath on my
face. 'The day that Grandfather was poisoned, he and Uncle
Roger were shut up in a room together for a long time. They

Agatha C hristie

Crooked House

were talking and talking. And Uncle Roger was very upset. He
said he was a failure - and that he wasn't upset because of the
money, but because Grandfath er had trusted him.'
I looked at her. 'Josephine,' I said, 'did you listen at the door?'
Josephine nodded her head. 'Yes,' she said . 'You have to listen
at doors if you want to find out things. I'm sure the police do and they look in people's desks and read all their letters, and find
out all their secrets. But they're stupid! They don't know where

Just at that moment a car arrived outside, and Josephine ran to
look out of the w indow. 'It's Mr Gaitskill, Grandfath er's lawyer,'
she said. ' I expect he's come about the w ill.' Very excited, she
hurried from the room.
A few minutes later Sophia and her mother M agda entered
w ith a small elderly man.
'Your husband asked me to bring his father's will,' the lawyer
was saying to M agda, 'but I don't have it. Do you know anything
about it?'
'About poor dear Grandfather's w ill? ' M agda opened her
eyes, astonished. 'No, of course not. He told us he'd sent it to
you after he signed it.'
'But the police didn't find the will with Mr Leonides' private
papers,' said Mr Gaitskill. 'I'll just go and talk to C hieflnspector
Taverner.' He left the room.
'Darling,' said Magda to her daughter. 'I'm sure that wicked
woman upstairs has destroyed it. I know I'm right.'
'Nonsense, Mother, she w ouldn't do a stupid thing like that,'

to look! '
Josephine spoke coldly, as if she was better than the police. I
didn't really notice the importance of what she said.
The unpleasan t child continued, 'Eustace and I know lots of
things - but I know more than Eustace does. And I won't tell
him. H e says women can't be great detectives. But they can. I'm
going to write dow n everythin g in a little black notebook and
then, when the police are completely confused, I'll tell them
who the murderer is.'
'Do you read a lot of detective stories, Josephine ?'
'Yes, lots.'
'And do you know who killed your grandfathe r?'
'Well, I think so - but I need to find a few more clues.' She
paused and added, 'Chief Inspector Taverner thinks that Brenda
did it, doesn't he? Or Brenda and Laurence together because
they're in love with each other.'
'You shouldn't say things like that, Josephine .'
'Why not? T hey are in love with each other.'
'You don't know that.'
'Yes, I do. They write to each other. Love letters.'
'Josephine! How do you know that?'
'Because I've read them. They're very ~ letters. But
Laurence is soppy. He was too frightened to fight in the war.'

said Sophia.
' It wouldn't be stupid at all. If there's no will, she'll get
everythin g.'
'Ssh - Mr Gaitskill 's coming back.'
The lawyer re-entered the room with Philip Leonides and
C hieflnspe ctor Taverner. 'I've talked to the bank,' the Inspector
was saying, 'but they don't have any private papers belonging to
Mr Leonides.'
'I wonder if Roger or Aunt Edith knows anything,' said
Philip. 'Sophia, can you ask them to come down here?'
But when the others arrived, they couldn't help.
'Father signed the will,' said Roger, 'and told us he was going
to post it to Mr Gaitskill the next day.'

Agatha Christie

Crooked Ho use

'I sent Mr Leonides his will ready for signing on November
24'\' Mr Gaitskill said. 'A week later he told me it had been
signed and sent to h,is bank to keep it safe.'
'That's right,' said Roger eagerly. 'It was in November last
year -you remember, Philip? - that Father read us the will.'
'And what did the w ill say?' asked Taverner.
'It was quite simple,' said Roger. 'Father left fifty thousand
pounds to Aunt Edith and one hundred thousand pounds and this
house to Brenda. The rest of Father's money and property was going
to be divided into three parts, one for myself, one for Philip and the
third for Sophia, Eustace and Josephine - and the money for the last
two was going to be kept in the bank until Eustace and Josephine
were twenty-one. I think that's right, isn't it, Mr Gaitskill?'
'That is correct,' agreed Mr Gaitskill, slightly annoyed that
he hadn't been allowed to explain the will himself.
'Father read it out to us,' said Roger, 'and asked if we had any
comments.'
'And Brenda said that she hated to hear her darling old
Aristide talk about death,' added Magda quickly. 'And when he
was dead, she didn't want any of his stupid money!'
' That's only what people of her class think they ought to say,'
said Miss de Haviland coldly.
I realized suddenly how much Edith de Haviland disliked
Brenda.
'And after reading the will, what happened next?' asked
Inspector Taverner. 'Exactly how and when did Mr Leonides
sign it? '
Roger looked round at his wife, so it was C lemency w ho
answered the Inspector's question. 'My father-in- law put the
will dow n on his desk and asked two of the servants to come
in,' she said. ' H e covered the will w ith a piece of paper so they

couldn't read it, then signed the will and asked the servants to
sign their own names under his signature.'
'That's right,' approved Mr Gaitskill. 'To be legal a w ill must
be signed in front of two w itnesses, who must then sign at the
same time.'
'And then what happened? ' asked Taverner.
'My father-in-law thanked the servants and they went out,'
said Clemency. 'Then he put the will in an envelope and said
that he would send it to Mr Gaitskill the n ext day.'
'Do you all agree,' said Chief Inspector Taverner, looking
round, 'that this is what happened?'
There were murmurs of agreement.
'You say that the will was on the desk,' continued Taverner.
'Were any of you near that desk?'
' N o - we w~re sitting about five or six yards away,' said
C lemency.
'And did Mr Leonides get up, or leave the desk, after reading
the w ill and before signing it?'
'No.'
C hieflnspector Taverner took out an envelope and gave it to
Mr Gaitskill. 'We found this with Mr Leonides' private papers,'
he said to the lawyer. 'Please have a look and tell me what it is.'
Mr Gaitskill looked at the contents of the envelope w ith
astonishment. ' I don't understand,' he said. 'This is the very same
w ill - but it isn't signed!'
'Perhaps it's j ust a copy,' suggested Roger.
'No,' said the lawyer. 'No, it's the very same will that I
prepared for Mr Leonides to sign - there is a small mark on the
paper that I noticed at the time. I swear it's the exact same w ill.'
'But that's impossible!' exclaimed Philip, speaking with more
excitement than I'd heard from him before. ' We saw both the

Agatha Christie

servants and my father sign the will. Father couldn't see very
well, but he was wearing his reading glasses that evening.'
'Yes, I remember that, too,' agreed Clemency.
'And nobody - you are all sure of that - went near the desk
before the will was signed?' asked. Taverner.
'Nobody went near the desk,' said Sophia. 'And Grandfather
sat there all the time.'
'Then I don't see how the will was changed,' said Taverner.
'Perhaps the signatures were erased or rubbed out?' Roger
suggested.
'But we would still be able to see signs of that,' said Mr
Gaitskill. 'And there aren't any.'
The family looked at one another.
'We were all there,' said Roger. 'It just couldn't have
happened.'
Miss de Haviland coughed. 'But it did happen,' she remarked.
'What I'd like to know is what happens next?'
'It is an interesting legal problem,' said Mr Gaitskill. 'This
will, of course, cancels all previous wills, and a large number of
witnesses saw Mr Leonides sign it.'
Taverner looked at his watch. Tm afraid,' he said, 'I must go
now. '
Everybody stood up, and I went quietly towards Sophia and
asked if I should go, too.
'Yes, I think that's best,' agreed Sophia. I followed Taverner
out of the room, and saw Josephine outside in the corridor. She
appeared to be amused about something.
'The police are very stupid,' she said.

Chapter 11
I arrived at my father's office at Scotland Yard to find Chief
Inspector Taverner talking about the case. 'I haven't discovered
anything at all,' he was explaining sadly. 'I can't find a financial
motive - they all have enough money - and there's no evidence
that Brenda Leonides and Laurence Brown were having a love
affair.'
'I can do better than that,' I said, sitting down. 'Roger
Leonides and his wife Clemency were planning to go abroad.
Roger and his father had an emotional interview on the day of
the old man's death. Aristide Leonides had found out something
was wrong, and Roger admitted it.'
'How do you know that?' demanded Taverner.
'A private detective told me.' I explained to them about
Josephine and how she thought Roger had been stealing money
from his company.
'It sounds as if the child knows everything that happens in
that house,' my father commented.
' If this information is true, it changes everything!' said
Taverner. 'If Roger was stealing money from the company
and his father found out, then Roger had a motive for killing
him. Brenda Leonides was out at the cinema. All Roger had
to do was go to his father's bathroom, empty out an insulin
bottle and fill it up with eserine. Or perhaps his wife Clemency
did it. She admitted that she went over to Aristide Leonides'
part of the house and I think she's quite capable of poisoning
someone.'
' I still don't think that Roger would use poison to kill
someone,' I said, 'but I agree that Clemency might.' I had liked
Roger. 'I don't think that Clemency cares about money - but

Agatha C hristie

Crooked House

she does care about her husband. For him she could be' - well,

'I've asked Roger Leonides to come here to my office,' my
father said. 'H e'll be here soon.'
Sure enough, R oger soon arrived, clumsily bumping into a
chair as he entered the room. In fact he was so clumsy that I
couldn't imagine him putting eserine into an insulin bottle surely he would have dropped the poison or broken the bottle?
'You wanted to see me? ' said Roger eagerly. 'Oh, hello,
C harles. I didn't see you. Have you found something?'
My father spoke coldly and officially, telling Roger about his
legal rights and asking him if he wanted a lawyer.
Roger looked confused. 'But why am I here?' he asked. 'I've
told you everything I know.'
'You did not tell us about the conversation you had with
your father on the afternoon of his death,' said Taverner, 'about
Associated Foods.'
Roger sat down suddenly, holding his face in his hands. ' I
didn't think anybody knew about that.'
'You need to tell us the truth,' said Taverner. 'Will Associated
Foods go bankrupt?'
'Yes,' admitted Roger. 'The company can't be saved now. I
wish my father had died without ever knowing ab out it. I feel so
ashamed. My father trusted me with his biggest company and I
failed him.'
'Why did you and your wife plan to go abroad w ithout telling
anybody? ' asked my father.
' I didn't do anything against the law,' said Roger, ' but I
didn't want to tell my father about it. H e was so fond of me and
would offer to help. But I'm no good at business or managing a
company. I've been so unhappy - I just wanted to escape from it
all. Clemency - she's a wonderful woman! - agreed to go away
w ith me without telling anyone, so we could live somewhere
simply and quietly.'

ruthless.'

***
The next day Taverner and my father had news. 'Roger's
company, Associated Foods, is definitely going to go bankrupt
soon,' reported Taverner, looking pleased and slightly excited.
'It's been badly managed for years.'
'By Roger Leonides?' I asked.
'Yes, he's in charge,' said Taverner. 'But we don't think he's
been stealing money. He just doesn't know how to run a business
properly and has made lots of bad decisions.'
'Roger was only in charge of such a big company because he
was Aristide Leonides' son,' my father remarked .
'He's been stupid,' added Taverner, ' but he hasn't done
anything against the law.'
'So why commit murder? ' I asked.
'Associated Foods needs a lot of money quickly to stop it
going bankrupt,' explained Taverner. 'Roger inherits a lot of
money now his father is dead. Though he won't get the money
in time, the banks will give him credit and the company can be
saved.'
'Why didn't Roger just ask his father for help?' I asked .
'I think he did,' said Taverner, 'and Josephine overheard. But
the old man refused to give Roger the money.'
I thought that Taverner was right. Aristide Leonides was a
generous man but he didn't like to waste money - he had refused
to give Magda the money to produce her play. I thought it was
unlikely that he would give Roger enough money - probably
hundreds of thousands of pounds - to save Associated Foods.
The only way for Roger to avoid financial ruin was if his father
died. It was a strong motive for murder.

Agatha Christie

Crooked House

'I see,' said my father slowly. 'So why did you change your
mind and ask your father for help?'
Roger stared at him. 'But I didn't!' he exclaimed. 'My father
found out himself. When he asked me about it, I told him
everything. The dear old man was so good and kind to me. He
insisted on giving me the money to save Associated Foods and
. wrote to his bank straight away.'
'Your father agreed to help you?' asked Taverner, astonished.
'Yes. I've still got the letter,' said Roger. 'I forgot to post it - I
was so shocked and confused after Father's death.' He looked in
his pockets. 'Here,' he said, finding the letter. 'Read it yourselves
if you don't believe me.'
My father and Taverner read the letter eagerly - I read it later.
Roger had told the truth. Aristide Leonides had asked his bank
to give Associated Foods enough money to save the company
from bankruptcy.
'What did you do after your father wrote this letter?' asked

Aristide Leonides had lived a day longer, Roger and Associated
Foods would have been all right. But because he died so soon the
company w ill now go bankrupt.'
'Maybe someone wanted Roger to fail?' suggested Taverner.
'What about the old man's will?' my father asked. 'Who
actually gets the money now?'
Taverner sighed. 'The lawyers can't tell us. There is an old
will but it was cancelled when the new will was made. But
if Aristide Leonides died without a legal will - then his w ife
Brenda Leonides gets everything. She's the most likely person
to have played tricks with the w ill - though I still have no idea
how.'
I didn't know either. We were looking at the problem from
the wrong way round.

Taverner.
'I rushed back to my own part of the house and told Clemency
what had happened - and how wonderful my father had been!
About half an hour later Brenda came rushing in saying that
Father was ill - just as I told you before.'
'So you didn't visit your father's bathroom at any time?' my
father asked.
'I don't think so. No - no, I am sure I didn't. Why, you don't
think that I -'
My father stood up and managed to interrupt. 'Thank you,
Mr Leonides,' he said, shaking Roger's hand. 'You have been
very helpful - though you should have told us all this before.'
When Roger had left, I looked at the letter. 'So Aristide
Leonides was going to help Roger,' said my father. 'That means
that Roger had no motive for murder. In fact -' he paused '- if

Crooked House

Chapter 12
Chief Inspector Taverner left, and my father and I were alone.
After a short silence, I asked, 'Dad, what are murderers like?'
Now that murder had come so close to me, I wanted to know
more about his previous police experience.
My father looked at me thoughtfully. 'Some of them' - he
smiled sadly - 'are very nice, ordinary people ... just like Roger
Leonides.'
I looked surprised. 'Oh yes,' he continued. 'Murderers can
be ordinary people who want something so much that they kill
for it. They don't think about what happens next. And some
people, although they know that murder is wrong, don't feel that
it's wrong. They think that it wasn't their fault or that their
victim deserved it - and they're never really sorry for what
they did.'
'Do you think,' I asked, 'that someone could kill old Leonides
if they hated him - hated him for a long time?'
' It's possible, but unlikely,' my father replied, looking at me
curiously. 'People are more likely to kill those they love than
those they hate. Only people you love can make your life
impossible. But this doesn't help you, does it?' he added. 'What
you really want to know is how to recognize a murderer in a
house full of people who seem pleasant and normal? '
'Yes, that's right,' I admitted.
My father paused to think. 'The one thing that all murderers
have in common,' he said finally, ' is that they are all vain. They
are frightened of being caught, but they still want to show off
about how clever they are. And a murderer wants to talk.'
'To talk? '

'Yes, because they're very lonely,' explained my father. 'They
can't tell anyone about what they did or how clever they are and they will never be able to tell. So they like talking about the
murder. I think, Charles, that you should go back to Three Gables
and get everyone to talk to you. Everyone in the family - ~
or innocent - will talk to you, because they can say things to you
that they can't say to each other. And if the murderer talks, he or
she might make a mistake and say too much.'
I told him then what Sophia had said about how the family
was ruthless, in different ways.
He was very interested. 'Yes,' he said. 'Most families have a
weakness, and it sounds as if both the de Haviland family and
the Leonides family have a different kind of weakness. But I
wouldn't worry too much about that, Charles. The best thing to
do is to go and talk to them all. Only the truth can help you and your Sophia.'
As I went out of the room, he added, 'And look after the
child - Josephine. We don't want anything to happen to her.'
I stared at him.
'Come on, Charles, think!' he said. 'There's a murderer
m that house, and Josephine seems to know everything that
happens there.'
'She certainly knew all about Roger,' I agreed, 'and her story
about what she overheard seems to be correct.'
'Yes,' said my father. 'A child's evidence is usually very
reliable, even if we can't often use it in court. But children like
to show off Ifyou want Josephine to tell you anything else, don't
ask her questions - instead pretend that you think she doesn't
know anything. But take care of her,' he added. 'It's possible that
she knows too much.'

Crooked H ouse

Chapter 13
As I went back to the C rooked House (as I called it in my own
mind) I felt slightly guilty. I hadn't told my father and Chief
Inspec tor Tavern er what Joseph ine had said about Brenda
Leonid es and Lauren ce Brown writing love letters to each other.
I told myself that it probab ly wasn't true. But really I didn't
want to find any eviden ce against Brenda . I felt sorry for her,
surrou nded by a family who dislike d her so much. And if there
were any love letters, Tavern er w ould soon find them.
And perhap s Joseph ine was wrong - though w hen
remem bered the intellig ence in her small black eyes,
doubte d it.
I had phoned Sophia earlier. 'Please come, Charle s,' she had
said. 'The police keep searchi ng the house, and we're all very
nervou s. I'll go crazy if I can't talk to someo ne.'
There was no one in sight as I drove up to the front door,
which was open . As I stood there, wondering w hether to ring
the bell or to walk in, I heard a noise behind me . I turned my
head and saw Joseph ine standin g by the hedge, eating a large
apple and lookin g at me.
'H ello, Joseph ine,' I said. She didn't answer, and disappeared
behind the hedge. When I followed , I found her sitting on a
woode n seat, swingi ng her legs. She looked at me coldly and
didn't speak.
'Why would n't you speak to me when I said hello?' I asked.
' I didn't want to,' said Joseph ine, still eating her apple.
'Why not?'
'You sneake d to the police about Uncle Roger, ' she said.
'Oh !' I said. 'But it's all right, Joseph ine. The police know
that Roger didn't steal any money or do anythi ng wrong. '

Joseph ine looked at m e as if I was stupid. 'I wasn't w orryin g
about Uncle Roger,' she said. 'But surely you know that in
detecti ve stories you never tell the police until the end?'
'Oh, I see,' I said. 'I'm sorry, Joseph ine. I'm really very sorry.'
'So you should be,' she replied. 'I trusted you.'
I said I was sorry again, and Joseph ine seemed to forgive m e.
She contin ued eating her apple.
'But the police would have found out anyway,' I said.
'Because Uncle R oger w ill be bankru pt?' As usual Joseph ine
knew what was going on. 'Father and Mothe r and U ncle Roger
and Aunt Edith are going to talk about it tonigh t. Aunt Edith
wants to give Uncle R oger all her money - though she hasn't got
it yet - but Father won't.'
Again I was impressed by how much she knew. 'Joseph ine,' I
said, ' you told m e that you were almost sure who the m urdere r
was?'
'Well ?'
'Who is it?' I asked. ' I promise I won 't tell Inspec tor
Tavern er.'
' I want a few more clues first,' said Joseph ine, throwi ng away
what was left of her apple. 'And I would n't tell you, anyway.'
'Then will you tell me more about the letters? ' I asked.
'What letters? '
' The letters you said Lauren ce Brown and Brenda wrote to
each other.'
' I made that up,' said J osephi ne. ' I often make things up. It
an1uses me.'
I stared at her, and she stared back. Somewhere, not very far
away, a twig snappe d w ith a sudden noise.
Rather late, I remem bered my father's advice. 'Oh well,' I
said, 'it's only a game for you. You don't really know anythi ng.'

Agatha C hristie

Josephine looked at me angrily, but she kept her mouth firmly
shut.
I got up. 'I must go and find Sophia now,' I said. 'Come
along.'
'I'm staying here,' said Josephine.
'No, you're not,' I insisted, pulling her to her feet. 'You're
coming in with me.'
Josephine seemed surprised but decided to come in with me probably to see how the family behaved when I arrived. It wasn't
until I walked through the front door that I realized why I hadn't
wanted Josephine to stay outside.
It was because of the sudden snapping of a tw ig.

Chapter 14
I heard voices coming from the big draw ing room, but I didn't go
in. Instead I walked down the corridor towards the kitchen and
pushed open the door. There I found Nannie, a large, cheerful
old woman. I knew she had worked for the family for many
years, looking after the children.
'It's Mr Charles, isn't it? ' she said. 'Come in and have a cup
of tea.'
I sat down in the big comfortable kitchen, and Nannie
brought me a cup of tea and two sweet biscuits. I felt like a small
child again - I felt that I was safe and that everything was all
right because Nannie was there.
'Miss Sophia will be glad you're here,' said Nannie. 'She's
been getting rather over-excited.' At that moment the door
opened with a rush and Sophia came in.
'Oh, Charles!' she said. 'Oh, Nannie, I'm so glad he's here.'
'I know you are, dear.' Nannie smiled to herself and went
into the room next door and shut the door behind her.
I put my arms round Sophia. 'D earest,' I said. 'You're shaking.
What's the matter?'
'I'm frightened, Charles,' said Sophia. 'I'm frigh tened. Someone
in this house - someone I see and speak to every day - is a
murderer. If only I knew who it was - '
I didn't know what to say. I wished I could take her home
w ith me, away from this house.
'And the worst thing is,' she w hispered, 'is that we may never
know.'
I knew she was right, and that we might never know who
poisoned Aristide Leonides. And then I remembered som ething
I'd wanted to ask her.

Agatha Christie

Crooked H ouse

' Tell me, Sophia,' I said. 'How many people in this house
knew about your grandfat her's eserine eyedrops, and that they
were poisonou s if injected? '
'That doesn't help, Charles,' she said, 'because we all knew.
We were all with Grandfa ther one day after lunch when Brenda
put the eserine drops in each of his eyes. Josephin e asked why it
said Not to be taken on the bottle of eyedrops. And Grandfather
smiled and said, "If Brenda made a mistake and injected me with
eyedrops instead of insulin, I would probably stop breathin g and
die, because my heart isn't very strong." Josephin e said, "Oo".
We were all listening - we all heard him say it.'
So Aristide Leonides had actually told the murdere r exactly
how to kill him! I took a deep breath. Sophia seemed to know
what I was thinking , and said, 'Yes, it's rather horrible, isn't it?'
Just then Nannie came back into the kitchen. She must have
overhear d what we were saying. 'I think you should forget about
such horrible things as murder,' she said. 'Leave it to the police.

and cool, and Edith was sitting up very straight, doing some
knitting. M agda and Eustace, both so good-loo king, sat together
on the sofa. Eustace's handsome face was unhappy.
As Sophia and I came in, everyone stopped talking and looked
at us. Philip frowned. 'Sophia, this is a private family meeting ,'
he said coldly.
I heard the click of Miss de H aviland's knitting needles.
'Charles and I hope to get married, ' Sophia said in a clear and
determin ed voice. 'I want him to be here.'
'And why not? ' said Roger. 'Charles knows all about it
already!'
'D o sit down,' C lemency said. I looked at her thankful ly as I
found myself a chair.
The family meeting continue d. 'I think we should do what
Aristide wanted, ' said Miss de H aviland. 'Roger, w hen the
w ill is sorted out you can have my money to help save the
company .'
Roger pulled at his hair. 'No, Aunt Edith. No!' he exclaimed.
'I suppose,' said Philip, 'that I might be able to give you a
little money.'
'That's not very fair to our children,' said Magda quickly.
Tm not going to take anyone's money!' Roger said excitedly.
'Of course he's not!' agreed Clemency.
'Anyway,' Magda added, 'Roger w ill have his own money
when the will is sorted out.'
'But surely he won't have the money iQ time to save the
company ?' said Eustace angrily.
'Eustace is right,' said Roger. 'Nothing can stop Associated
Foods from going bankrup t. It's too late.' He sounded almost
pleased. 'And wh at does the company matter compare d to the
fact that Father is dead?'

It's their business, not yours.'
'But Nannie, don't you realize that someone in this house is
a murdere r?' said Sophia.
'Nonsense,' replied Nannie. 'The front door is open all the
time. Anyone could get in to this house.' She again went into
the room next door.
'Come on, Charles,' said Sophia. ' Let's go to the drawing
room. There's a family meeting about Roger's business affairs.
If you're going to marry me, you need to see what my family is
really like.'
In the drawing room all the family were there, except
Brenda and Josephin e. Philip's face looked cold and serious,
while Roger's face was red and he looked annoyed . C lemency,
who was looking at the paintings on the wall, looked calm

Agatha Christie

'We are only trying to help,' Philip said stiffly, his face turning
slightly red.
' I know, Phil, I know,' said Roger. 'But there's nothing you
can do. It was all my fault - I was in charge.'
'Yes,' Philip said slowly, looking at him. 'You were in charge.'
Edith de Haviland stood up. 'I think we've talked enough
about this,' she said w ith such power in her voice that everyon e
went quiet. It seemed that the family meeting was over.
Magda and Eustace got up and left the room, while Roger
put his hand on Philip's arm and said, 'Thanks, Phil, for try ing
to help.' The brothers went out together followed by Sophia,
w ho said that she would get my room ready as I was staying the
night.
Edith de H aviland put away her knitting. She looked towards
me as ifshe was going to speak, but she changed her mind, sighed,
and went out after the others. I was left alone w ith C lemency,
who was looking out of the w indow, and went to stand beside
her.
Tm glad that's over,' she said. 'Magda arranged it all - just
like a play. Act II - the family meeting. There was nothing really
to discuss.'
She sounded pleased about it rather than sad. 'Don't you
understand?' she asked. 'We're free - at last! Roger h as b een
unhappy for years - he was never any good at business, and it
broke his heart because he failed his father. Roger loved his
father a great deal - they all did.'
C lemency turned to look at me. ' It's ridiculous to think
that Roger would have killed his father, especially for money.
Roger was actually glad when he knew the company would go
bankrupt. He was looking forward to our new life.'
' Where were you going? ' I asked.

Crooked House

'To Barbados,' she replied. 'A cousin of mine died recently
and left me a small house and some land. We'll be very poor,
but we'll be together, away from all Roger's family. And I don't
mind not having much money - I don't like money. I was happy
with my first husband when we were poor - and I didn't love
him like I love Roger.' She closed her eyes and smiled to herself
I could tell how strong her feelings were.
And I was sure that Clemency meant what she said. She
wasn't interested in money, or living in luxury.
'Are you still going to Barbados?' I asked.
'Oh, yes, as soon as the police w ill let us. When everything
has been sorted out we can leave - I hope it doesn't take too
long.'
'Clemency,' I said, 'do you have any idea who did this? Any
idea at all?'
She gave me a strange look, and when she spoke her voice
sounded stiff and awkward. 'I'm a scientist - I deal w ith facts,
not guesses. All I can say is that Brenda and Laurence are the
obvious suspects.'
'So you think they did it?'
C lemency shrugged her shoulders, and stood for a moment
as if she was listening. Then she went out of the room, passing
Edith de Haviland on the way.
Edith came straight over to me~ ' I want to talk to you,' she
said, 'about Philip. I hope you didn't get the wrong idea about
him - Philip is rather difficult to understand. He may seem cold,
but he isn't really.'
'I didn't really think-' I began.
She didn't let me speak. 'Philip is really a dear, when you
understand him. You see, Aristide loved all his children dearly,
but Roger - the oldest- was his true favourite. And I think Philip

Agatha C hristie

felt it, and though he always hides his feelings, he suffered - as
children do. He's always been jealous ofRoger, even ifhe doesn't

Chapter 15

realize it himself.'
'So do you think that Philip is secretly pleased that Roger's

'Your room's ready,' said Sophia.
We stood together, looking out of the window at the grey and
windy garden. It was getting dark outside, and as we watched,
two people came through the hedge and walked back towards
the house.
The first person was Brenda Leonides. She was wearing a
grey fur coat and moved quickly and easily like a cat. As she
passed the window, I saw that she was smiling.
A few minutes later we saw Laurence Brown walk through
the hedge. It didn't look as if he and Brenda had been for a normal
walk - there was something secretive in the way they returned
to the house. I wondered if it was Brenda's or Laurence's foot that
had snapped the twig.
That made me think ofJosephine, and I asked Sophia where
she was.
'She's probably w ith Eustace in the schoolroom.' Sophia
replied. 'I'm worried about Eustace.'
'Why?'
She frowned. ' H e's behaving so strangely lately, since he's
been ill. I don't know what he's thinking. Sometimes he seems
to hate us all.'
'He'll probably change as he gets older. It's just a temporary
thing.'
'Yes, I suppose so,' said Sophia. 'But I do worry - perhaps
because Mother and Father don't. I didn't notice until I came
back from the war, but they are a strange couple. Father lives in
the past, with his history books, and Mother makes everything
into a scene from a play. She arranged that meeting tonight
because she was bored and wanted a dramatic scene.'

company has failed?'
'Yes,' said Miss de H aviland. 'I do think that. And it upset me
that Philip didn't want to help Roger straightaway.'
'Why should he?' I said. 'Roger is a grown man, with no
children to think about. If he was ill or very poor, his family
would help - but I'm sure Roger would prefer to start a new life
without their help.'
'Yes, I'm sure he would,' said Miss de Haviland, 'and so would
C lemency.'
She looked at me. 'I realize that this is all very difficult for
Sophia,' she continued. 'I'm sorry that she has so much to deal
w ith when she is still so young. I love them all, you know Roger and Philip, and now Sophia, Eustace and Josephine. I love
all my sister's children and grandchildren.'
She paused for a few moments. 'Yes, I love them dearly. But
not too much,' she added, before turning abruptly and going out
of the room.
I had the feeling that her last remark was important - but I
did not understand it.

Crooked House

Agatha Christie

'Forget about your family, Sophia,' I said firmly.
'I wish I could. I was happy in Cairo when I could forget
about them.'
I remembe red that Sophia had never mention ed her home or
her family.
'Is that why you never talked about them?' I asked. 'Because
you wanted to forget them?'
'I think so. We're all too fond of each other and we all live
too closely together - all together in a little crooked house. We
haven't grown up separately and become independ ent. We're all
tangled together and have grown up crooked. '
I remembe red Edith de Haviland grinding the weed under
her foot, just as Sophia added, 'Like bindwee d.'
And then suddenly Magda burst through the door and turned
on the lights. 'What an incredible scene that was,' she said.
'Eustace was so annoyed , and I love it when Roger gets angry
and pulls his hair. And Edith really meant it when. she offered
Roger her money - she'd do anything for this family.'
'It must have been hard for her after her sister died,' I remarked ,
'especially because she disliked old Leonides so much.'
'Disliked him?' interrup ted Magda. 'Who told you that?
Nonsense. She was in love with him.'
'Mother! ' said Sophia.
'But she herself told me,' I argued, 'that she always disliked him.'
'She probably did when she first came here,' said Magda.
'She was angry with her sister for marryin g him. But she was
definitely in love with him - I know I'm right! Edith didn't like
it when he married Brenda. She didn't like it at all!'
'You and Father didn't like it either,' said Sophia .
'No, of course we didn't,' said Magda, 'but Edith hated it
most - I've seen the way she looks at Brenda.' Then she added,

on a completely different subject, 'I've decided to send Josephin e
to school in Switzerland. It's not good for her to be here at the
moment. I'm going to arrange it tomorrow .'
'Grandfa ther didn't want Josephin e to go to school,' said
Sophia slowly.
'Darling old Grandfat her liked us all to live together , but I
think that Josephin e should be with other children. Switzerland
is such a healthy place - it will be good for her.'
Magda stood up, smiled and went towards the door. 'Childre n
must come first,' she said as she went out. It was a lovely exit line.
Sophia sighed. 'Mother is annoyin g when she gets a sudden
idea. Why should Josephin e be sent away to Switzerl and in such
a hurry?'
'It might be good for Josephin e to go to school,' I said.

'Grandfa ther didn't think so,' argued Sophia.
I was slightly irritated. 'Did such an old man really know
what was best for Josephin e?' I asked.
'He did know best,' insisted Sophia, 'though I admit that
Josephin e is rather difficult. She likes to sneak around and spy on
people, but only because she's playing at being a detective.'
I thought about how Josephin e seemed to know everythi ng
that happene d in the house. Perhaps Magda had another reason
for suddenly sending Josephin e to school - Switzerl and was a
long way away.

Crooked House

Chapter 16
As I washed my face the nex t morning, I thought about what
I'd learned. People had talked to me, just as my father said they
would.
The only person who hadn't talked to me was Philip Leonides.
I thought that was strange, especially as he knew I wanted to
marry his daughter. Edith de Haviland had told me that Philip
had been an unhappy child, jealous of his brother Roger. Could
Philip have killed his father - not for money, but so that Roger
would be blamed for it?
I looked at my face in the mirror. What was I trying to do prove that Sophia's father was a murderer? That wasn't what
Sophia wanted!
Or - was it? Did Sophia herself suspect her father, and was
she bravely trying to find out the truth ? What did Edith de
Haviland mean when she said she loved the family, but not
'too much'? And why had C lemency looked at me so strangely,
_ before she said that Brenda and Laurence were the obvious
suspects?
Everyone in the family wanted Brenda and Laurence to be
guilty, but they didn't really believe it.
Of course, Brenda and Laurence could really be guilty, I
thought. Or it could be Laurence, and not Brenda - that would
be better. But that was only what I wanted to be true - it wasn't
necessarily the truth.
Still, I wanted to talk to Laurence Brown, so after breakfast I
decided to visit him in the schoolroom. As I went into Brenda's
part of the house, I noticed that none of the doors was locked,
and there was no one to see me as I went into Aristide Leonides'
bathroom.

In the bathroom I looked in the cupboard and found the
bottles of insulin and syringes. Everything was clear, well
arranged and easy to get to. It was impossible for the police to
find out who put the eyedrops in the insulin bottle - anyone
could have done it.
As I went through the house, I didn't see anyone else, though
I heard Edith de Haviland talking on the telephone. W hen I
got to the schoolroom, I stopped outside the door to listen - I
was behaving just like Josephine, I thought'. I was very surprised
to hear Laurence Brown talking with amazing imagination and
enthusiasm - he was an excellent teacher. And although I didn't
hear Josephine say much, when Eustace spoke, he showed that he
was both interested and intelligent.
After a while the lesson ended and Eustace and Josephine
came out. They looked surprised to see me, but while Eustace
waited politely, Josephine went past me, uninterested.
I told Eustace I just wanted to see the schoolroom, and he
opened the door for me. Laurence Brown looked up and then
quickly left the room.
'You frightened him,' said Eustace.
'Do you like him?' I asked.
'Oh, he's all right. He knows a lot and he's a good teacher he makes you see things differently.'
W e talked for a while about history and poetry. Eustace,
though he seemed to be bad-tempered, was an interesting person
to talk to. I soon realized that he was bad tempered because of his
illness, which had been frightening and difficult for him. Before
his illness he had been ertjoying his life and his time at school.
' I wish I was well enough to go back to school,' he told me.
'I was going to be in the football team. I hate staying home and
having lessons with Josephine - she's only twelve.'

Agatha Christie

Crooked H ouse

I said that Josephine was quite an intelligent girl for her age.
'I don't think so,' said her brother arrogantly. 'She's pretending
to be a detective at the moment, sneaking around and writing
things down in a little black book. It's just silly. Mother is quite
right to send her to school.'
'Won't you miss her?' I asked.
'Miss Josephine? Of course not,' said Eustace, 'she's only a
kid. Really, all my family are impossible to live with! Mother's
always making a big drama about nothing, and Father's shut
away with his books.'
I remembered how sensitive and embarrassed about my family
I had been when I was sixteen. 'What about your grandfather?'
I said. 'Do you miss him?'
A curious expression showed on Eustace's face. 'All
Grandfather thought about was how to make money,' he said.
'He was too old to enjoy his life properly - it was time for him
to die. He-'
Eustace stopped as Laurence Brown came back into the
schoolroom. 'Please be back here at eleven, Eustace,' said Laurence.
'We've wasted too much time in the last few days.'
'OK, sir.' Eustace went out, leaving me alone with his
teacher.
Laurence Brown was looking at me nervously. 'How are the
police getting on?' he asked. His nose tw itch ed, remindi ng
me of a mouse in a trap. 'Are they going to arrest anyone
soon?'
' I don't know,' I replied.
Laurence became even more nervous. 'You don't know what
it's like,' he said quickly. 'Not knowing what the police really
want - they keep asking strange questions .. .'
I let him keep talking.

'What Chief Inspector Taverner suggested - about Brenda
Leonides and me,' he continued. 'It's just not true! The family
has never liked me.'
His hands began to shake. 'They are rich and powerful - and
I'm only a teacher. I didn't fight in the war - I knew I couldn't
kill anyone ! Everyone's always laughed at me. I always do things
wrong. Everyone's against me. Whoever killed Mr Leonides
arranged it so that I would be suspected.'
'What about Brenda Leonides?' I asked.
Laurence's face reddened, and he suddenly behaved less like a
mouse and more like a man.
'Brenda Leonides is an angel,' he said firmly. 'She is sweet and
kind and would never poison anyone. T he police are ridiculous
if they suspect her!'
H e went over to a bookcase and began sorting the books. I
didn't think he was going to say any more, so I left him alone.
As I was walking along the corridor, a door o n my left opened
and Josephine suddenly appeared in front of me. H er face and
h ands were very dirty, and there was a spider's web in her hair.
'Where have you been, Josephine?'
Through the half-open door I could see steps leading up to
a small attic.
Josephine replied briefly, 'Up in the attic. Detecting.'
'What is there to detect up in the attic?' I asked curiously.
'I must wash,' was all Josephine said, before going towards the
bathroom. At the door she turned back to me and said, ' I think
it's time for the next murder, don't you ?'
'What do you mean - the next murder?' I asked with surprise.
'Well, in books there's always a second murder about now.
Someone who knows something is killed before they can tell
anyone.'

Agatha Christie

'You read too many detective stories, Josephine,' I said. 'Real
life isn't like that.'
The only answer I got was the sound of water from a t!J;!, so
I left Josephine to wash. As I went back to the other part of the
house, Brenda came out through the drawing room door and put
her hand on my arm.
'Well?' she asked, looking up at my face.
I shook my head. 'I don't have any news.'
Tm so frightened,' she said. 'Charles, I'm so frightened.'
H er fear was very real - I could feel it. She was so alone. I
wanted to help her, to make her feel safe, but there was nothing
I could do or say. I suddenly felt that Sophia was watching me,
and remembered her saying, 'Yes, Brenda does seem to get on
well with men.'
'The inquest is tomorrow,' Brenda said. 'And I'm sure there'll
be newspaper reporters there.'
'Just don't talk to them,' I said. 'Perhaps you should get a
lawyer, Brenda, to look after your interests and advise you what
to say and do. You see,' I added, 'you're very much alone.'
Her hand held my arm more closely. 'Yes,' she said. 'You do
understand, C harles. And you have helped.'
I went downstairs feeling warm and satisfied. Then I saw
Sophia standing by the front door. 'You've been a long time,' she
said coldly. 'Your father telephoned. He wants you to go back to
London.'
'Did he say why?'
Sophia shook her head. H er eyes were anxious.
'Don't worry, darling,' I said, putting my arm around her. 'I'll
soon be back.'

Chapter 17
When I arrived at his office at Scotland Yard, I found my father
talking to Chieflnspector Taverner and Mr Gaitskill the lawyer,
who seemed a little upset.
'Oh, hello, Charles,' said my father as I came in. 'Something
rather surprising h as happened.'
'Surprising!' exclaimed Mr Gaitskill.
'This morning,' continued my father, 'Mr Gaitskill received
a letter from someone called Mr Agrodopolous, who is an old
friend of Aristide Leonides. In with the letter was Aristide
Leonides' will. Mr Leonides had asked Mr Agrodopolous to
send the w ill to Mr Gaitskill after his death.'
' I have been Mr Leonides' lawyer for over forty years,' said
Mr Gaitskill. 'Why didn't he trust me?' He was obviously
upset.
'When Mr Gaitskill opened the will,' my father added, ' he
decided that we should see it at once.'
'It is not the same will that I prepared,' said Mr Gaitskill. 'Mr
Leonides wrote it himself - a very unprofessional thing to do.'
This was all very interesting, but I didn't understand why
I was involved. ' Is the will different?' I asked. ' I mean, is the
money left to someone else?'
My father was looking at me. Chief Inspector Taverner was
very carefully not looking at me. I felt slightly uneasy.
I looked at Mr Gaitskill. 'Am I right,' he said, 'in saying that
you are going to marry Miss Sophia Leonides?'
'I hope to marry her,' I said, 'but she doesn't want to become
engaged at the moment.'
'In this will,' said Mr Gaitskill, 'Aristide Leonides leaves his
wife one hundred thousand pounds, and everything else to his
granddaughter, Sophia Leonides.'

Agatha Christie

Crooked House

I gasped - I hadn't expected this! 'But why did he leave
everything to Sophia?' I asked.
.
'Mr Leonides explained his reasons in this letter, which was
with the will,' said my father, handing me the letter to read.

'Extraordinary,' I said, after reading the letter.
'Most extraordinary,' said Mr Gaitskill. 'I repeat, I do think
my old friend Mr Leonides could have trusted me.' He stood up
and left the room, his professional pride obviously hurt.
'Now it's been explained, it seems obvious,' said Taverner.
'Aristide Leonides was the only person who could have played
tricks with that w ill. We were stupid not to think of it.'
I remembered Josephine saying how stupid the police were.
But she hadn't been there when the will was made, and I didn't
think she could guess what her grandfather had done. So why
did she say the police were stupid? Was she just show ing off?
Suddenly I realized how quiet the room was. I looked up
to see that both my father and Taverner were watching me.
'Sophia knew nothing about this!' I said. 'Nothing at all. She'll
be amazed.'
'Will she?' asked my father.
There was a pause, which was ended by the sudden loud ring
of the telephone on the desk. My father answered. 'It's your young
woman,' he told me. 'She wants to speak to you. It's urgent.'
I took the receiver from him. 'Sophia?' I said. 'What's the
matter?'
'Charles? Is that you?' said Sophia, sounding very upset.
'It's - Josephine! She's been hit on the head and has concussion.
She - the doctor says she m ay not recover .. .'
'Josephine's been knocked out,' I told my father and Taverner.
My father frowned. 'I told you to look after that child,' he
said sharply.

Dear Gaitskill,
I am sorry that I have behaved so secretly. Let me explain why. I
have always believed that in a family there is one strong character who
looks after everyone else. In my family I was that person, and I have
been lucky enough to live a long time and take care of my children and
grandchildren. But when I die, someone else must take care of the family.
After much thought I have decided that neither of my sons is the
right person to do this. My dearly loved son Roger has no business
sense, and has poor judgement. My son Philip is too unsure of himself
and is hiding from life. Eustace, my grandson, is very young and I
do not think that he has enough sense and self-control. Only my
granddaughter Sophia has intelligence, good judgement and courage and is fair and generous. I believe she is the best person to take care of
thefamily, including my sister-in-law Edith de Haviland, to whom I
am very grateful for her lifelong care of my children and grandchildren.
Now I must explain why I kept my decision secret from you. I
thought it best not to tell the family I was leaving everything to Sophia.
I asked you to prepare a will, which I read out to all my family. I put
both the wills on my desk and covered them with a piece of paper.
When the servants came in, I moved up the piece of paper and we all
signed the will that I wrote myself- not the will that you prepared.
Please forgive mefor not telling you about this - I am an old man
and wanted to keep it secret. Thank you, my dear friend, for all the
care you have taken while dealing with my affairs. G ive Sophia my
love and ask her to take care of my family.
Yours very sincerely,
Aristide Leonides

Crooked House

Chapter 18
Taverner and I were immediate ly driven to Swinly Dean in a fast
police car. On the way I remember ed how Josephine had talked
about a 'second murder'. The poor child hadn't known that she
was to be the second victim. Josephine must know something
about the murder that we didn't.
I remember ed the snap of the twig in the garden. I should
have taken better care of Josephine . Had Magda realized that
her daughter was in danger? Was that why she suddenly wanted
Josephine to go away to school in Switzerland?
As we arrived , Sophia came out to meet us. Josephine , she
said, was in the local hospital, and Dr Gray would telephone as
soon as there was any news.
'How did it happen?' asked Taverner.
Sophia led us round to the back of the house and through
a door to a small yard. In one corner was an old wash-house.
'Josephine likes to play here,' she explained . The wash-hou se
was small and dark inside, and full of wooden boxes and old
broken furniture. Just inside the door was a stone door-stop .
'It's the door-stop from the front door,' Sophia explained . ' It
must have been balanced on top of the door.'
'A booby trap,' said Taverner, reaching up a hand to touch
the top of the low door. Then he looked at the door-stop. 'Has
anyone touched this?'
'No,' said Sophia. 'I told everyone not to.'
'You're quite right. Who found her?'
'I did. She didn't come in for dinner at one o'clock. N annie
said she had seen Josephine go outside about quarter of an
hour before. I said I would go and get her,' replied Sophia .
'Who knew thatJosephine liked to play here?' asked Taverner

'Everyone in the house knew,' Sophia said. 'No one really
comes out here except her.'
'And you can't see this little yard from the house,' said
Taverner thoughtfully. 'Anyone could have set that booby trap.
He looked up at the door. 'She was unlucky,' he said. 'It could
easily have missed her.' Next Taverner looked at the floor. There
were various deep marks in it. ' It looks as if someone tried the
doorstop out first, to see just where it would fall.'
'We didn't hear anything,' said Sophia. 'We had no idea until
I found her lying face down.' Her voice shook. 'There was blood
on her hair.'
' Is that Josephine 's? ' Taverner pointed to a wool scarf lying
on the floor.
'Yes.'
U sing the scarf Taverner carefully picked up the stone doorstop. 'There may be fingerprints,' he explained , tho ugh he spoke
without much hope. 'What are you looking at, C harles?'
I was examining an old wooden chair with a broken back
which was with the other old furniture. On the seat of the chai;
were a few small pieces of mud.
' Interesting,' said Taverner. 'Someone stood on that chair
with muddy feet. Now why was that?'
I had no suggestion s. Taverner shook his head. 'What time
did you find Josephine, Miss Leonides?'
'About five minutes past one.'
'And Nannie saw her going out about twenty minutes earlier.
Has anyone else been out here today?'
'I've no idea,' said Sophia. 'But Josephine herself was here
after breakfast this morning.'
'So someone set the trap between then and a quarter to one.
Did you notice that the door-stop was missing? '

Agatha Christie

Crooked House

Sophia shook her head. ' It's been too cold to have the door
open today,' she explained.
'And do you know where everyone was this morning?'
'I went out for a walk,' replied Sophia. 'Eustace and Josephine
had lessons until half-past twelve - with a break at half-past ten.
I think Father has been in the library all morning, and Mother
was just getting up when I came in at about a quarter past twelve.
She doesn't get up very early.'
We went back into the house, and I followed Sophia to the
library. Philip and Magda were sitting close together. Philip's
face was white and Magda was crying.
'Have they telephoned from the hospital yet?' Sophia asked.
Philip shook his head.
'Why wouldn't they let me go w ith her? ' cried M agda. 'My
baby - my funny, ugly baby. She hated it when I called her that.
She' ll die - I know she'll die.'
'Hush, my dear,' said Philip. 'Hush.'
I felt that I had no place in this sad family scene, so instead
I went to find Nannie. She was sitting in the kitchen, crying
quietly. 'This is all because of me, Mr Charles, because of the
awful things I've been thinking.'
I didn't understand what she meant.
'There's wickedness in this house,' Nannie continued. 'I didn't
want to see it or believe it. But somebody killed Mr Leonides
and the same somebody has tried to kill Josephine.'
'But why should anyone try to kill Josephine? ' I asked.
'You know what she's like, Mr Charles,' Nannie said. 'She
always wants to know things and find out things. You see, she
was always a very ordinary little girl, not good-looking like her
brother and sister. Her mother sometimes ignored her and said
she was ugly. Josephine hated that and it had a bad effect on her.

She started sneaking around and spying on people. But that isn't
safe when there's a poisoner about! '
I murmured in agreement. And then I remembered something.
'Do you know where Josephine kept her little black book, where
she wrote things down?' I asked Nannie.
'I've no idea, Mr C harles. It wasn't with her when she was
found.'
Had someone takenJosephine's notebook? Or had she hidden
it in her own room? I thought I would go and look. I went
upstairs and stopped - I didn't know where Josephine's room
was - but then I heard Taverner calling me:
'Come in here,' he said. 'I'm in the girl's room - it's a real
mess.'
The small room was indeed a mess. Drawers had been pulled
out and their contents thrown on the floor. Everything had been
pulled off the small bed. The chairs had been turned upside
down and the pictures taken down from the wall. Someone had
been looking for something.
'Did anyone hear or see anything?' I asked.
'It seems not,' said Taverner. 'I've checked and anyone in the
house could have done this - and set the booby trap. It could
have been Philip, Magda, Nannie or your girl, Sophia. Brenda
was alo ne all morning, Laurence Brown and Eustace had a halfhour break from lessons and Miss de Haviland was in the garden
alone. Roger was in his study and even Clemency didn't go to
work today. I've no idea who it was - or what they were looking
for.'
I suddenly remembered where I had seen Josephine last.
'Wait !' I said, and ran out of the room and up the stairs to the
attic, where Josephine had been 'detecting'. It was dark and
the ceilings were low, but it was a good place to hide things, I

Agatha Christie

thought, as I started to search properly. Indeed, it didn't take me
long to find a packet ofletters wrapped in brown paper.
I read the first letter.

Oh Laurence - my darling, my dear love . . . I'm sure everything
will be all right. Aristide has been so good to me. I don't want him
to suffer, but there can't be any pleasure in living when you're over
eighty. Soon we shall be together for always. How wondeiful it will
be when I can call you my dear, dear husband. I love you, love you,
love you ...
I grimly went downstairs and gave Taverner the letters. 'This
might be what someone was looking for,' I told him.
Taverner looked through the letters and read a few lines.
Then he looked up at me, with a satisfied expression on his face.
'So it was them,' he said quietly. 'Brenda Leonides and
Laurence Brown - it was them the whole time.'

Chapter 19
From the moment I found the letters all the sympathy and l1iU'.
I had felt for Brenda Leonides disappeared completely. She had
lit:<l tu mt:, and had tried to kill Josephine.
'But I think it was Laurence Brown who set that booby trap,'
said Taverner. 'That explains what puzzled me about it.Josephine
had the letters but the murderer couldn't find them, so he tried
to kill her. But why didn't he just hit Josephine on the head
himself? Putting a stone door-stop on top of a door is stupid. It
could have missed or not hurt Josephine at all. So why do it?'
'Well,' I said, 'what's the answer?'
'At first I thought it was to fit in with someone's alibi - b~t no
one has an alibi. But if it was Laurence Brown it all makes sense.
He doesn't like violence, and he couldn't hit Josephine himself
With the booby trap he didn't have to see it happen.'
'Yes, I see,' I said slowly. ' It's just like putting the eserine in
the insulin bottle.'
'Exactly.'
'Do you think Brenda knew? ' I asked.
'I don't think she helped set the booby trap,' said Taverner,
'but I think the eserine was her idea, even if she made Laurence
Brown do it himself. And with these letters, th ere's a clear case
against both of them.'
He looked at me. 'So how does it feel to be marrying a very
rich girl?' he asked.
I'd forgotten about the will. 'Sophia doesn't know yet,' I said.
'Do you want me to tell her?'
'Mr Gaitskill is going to tell everyone tomorrow, after the
inquest,' said Taverner. 'I wonder what the family will say?'

Crooked House

Chapter 20
Nothing unusual happened at the inquest, because the police had
said that they needed more time to collect the evidence.
We were all feeling more cheerful, however, because we'd
heard from the hospital that Josephine was not as badly hurt
as we thought, and she was getting better quickly. She wasn't
allowed any visitors at the moment - not even her mother.
' Particularly not her mother,' murmured Sophia. ' I made that
quite clear to Dr Gray. Mother would only make a big dramatic
scene, which isn't good for someone who's been hit on the head.'
'You think of everything, don't you, darling,' I said. Aristide
Leonides had been right to choose Sophia, I thought. She was
already taking care of the family.
After the inquest, Mr Gaitskill came back to Three Gables and
made his important announcement. He read Aristide Leonides'
letter and then the will itself.
It was very interesting to watch. I was just sorry I couldn't
watch everyone at the same time.
Philip's mouth was shut tightly, and he didn't speak. Magda,
however, spoke as soon as Mr Gaitskill finished. 'Darling Sophia,'
she said, 'how extraordinary - how romantic ! But poor darling
Roger. Now he doesn't have the money to save the company.
Sophia, you must help Roger.'
'No,' said Clemency. 'We don't want anything!'
Roger stepped forward clumsily. 'We don't want any money,'
he said, holding Sophia's hands. 'Clemency and I are going to
Barbados to live a quiet life.' H e smiled. 'But if I ever need
anything, I'll ask the head of the family.'

'But Roger, you can't just go bankrupt and leave the country,'
said Edith de Haviland. 'It makes the family, and Sophia, look
bad - as if we didn't try to help you.'
Roger put his arms round his aunt and hugged her. 'Aunt
Edith,' he said, 'you are a darling, but you don't understand what
Clemency and I want!'
'None of you,' added C lemency, annoyed, 'understands
Roger. You never have, and you never will! Come on, Roger.'
They left the room as Mr Gaitskill pretended to sort his
papers. It was clear that he deeply disliked such family dramas.
When I looked at Sophia herself, she was standing up straight
and her eyes were calm. She had just inherited an enormous
fortune, but my first thought was that now she was alone, separate
from the rest of her family. Her grandfather had believed that she
was strong enough to be responsible for everyone else, but just
then I felt very sorry for her.
'Congratulations, Sophia,' said Mr Gaitskill. 'You are a very
rich woman. If you w ish to discuss anything else, I'll be very
happy to advise you.'
'What about Roger?' insisted Edith de Haviland.
'Roger,' said Mr Gaitskill quickly, 'must look after himself.
He's a grown man. And he'll never be a successful businessman.'
He looked at Sophia. 'If you save Associated Foods from
bankruptcy, Roger is the wrong man to manage it.'
'I'm not going to save Associated Foods fro~ bankruptcy,'
said Sophia clearly. ' It would be a stupid thing to do.'
Mr Gaitskill looked at her and smiled to himself. Then he
said goodbye and left the family alone together.
Everyone was silent for a moment, before Philip stood up.
'I must get back to the library,' he said. 'I have wasted a lot of
time.'

Agatha· Christie

C rooked House

'Father -' Sophia spoke uncertainly. She stepped back as
Philip looked at her coldly.
'I won't congratulate you,' he said. 'I am too shocked and
humiliated that my father has ignored my lifelong devotion to
him - yes - devotion! ' For the first time his emotions broke
through. 'How could he do this to me?' he exclaimed. ' He was
always unfair to me - always!'
'Oh, Philip,' cried Edith de Haviland. 'Please don't think
that!'
'He never cared for me,' said Philip, in a rough, low voice. ' It
was always Roger. At least Father finally realized that Roger was
a fool and a failure.' His handsome face was full ofjealousy. 'He
didn't leave Roger anything either.'
'What about me?' said Eustace.
I saw that Eustace was shaking with violent emotion. His
face was bright red and there were tears in his eyes. 'How could
Grandfather do this to me?' he said, his voice high and angry. ' I
hate him. I'll never forgive him as long as I live. I wanted him to
die. I wanted to get out of this house. Now Sophia is in charge
and I w ish I was dead . . .' He rushed out of the room.
'He has no self-control,' said Edith de H aviland quietly.
' I know just how Eustace feels ,' said Magda. 'The poor
darling! I must go after him.'
'Now, Magda -' Edith hurried after her.
Sophia stayed behind, looking at her father. But Philip again
looked at her coldly, quite in control of himself once m ore.
'You've managed things very cleverly, Sophia,' he said and
went out of the room.
'That was a cruel thing to say,' I said to Sophia, holding
her in my arms. 'Your grandfather shouldn't have done this
to you.'

' He thought I could bear it,' said Sophia, 'and I can. But I
don't like Father and Eustace being so upset.'
'Your mother's all right.'
'But she won't like asking me for money for her new play,'
said Sophia.
"What will you say if she does?' I asked curiously.
Sophia stood up very straight. 'I'll say no,' she said. 'It's a bad
play and it w ill be a failure. It's a w aste of money.'
I lau ghed. 'That's why your grandfather left everything to
you,' I said. 'You're just like him.'

Crooked House

Chapter 21
I was sorry that Josephine had missed all the drama - she would
have enjoyed it. She was getting better very quickly and would
soon be home. But before she came back, one more important
event took place.
I was in the garden one morning with Brenda - who said
that she needed some exercise - and Sophia. After a while
Brenda said abruptly, 'You're giving Laurence the sack, Sophia.
Why?'
'We're making other arrangements for Eustace,' Sophia said
quietly. 'And Josephine is going to Switzerland.'
'Well, you've upset Laurence very much . He feels you don't
trust him.'
Sophia didn't answer and at that moment a car arrived in
front of the house, and Chieflnspector Taverner stepped out. H e
went into the house.
'Why have the police come back?' said Brenda nervously.
'What do they want now?'
I thought I knew w hy they had come - because of the letters.
Taverner came out of the house again and walked over to us.
He spoke to Brenda in his official voice. 'Brenda Leonides, I am
arresting you on suspicion of murdering Aristide Leonides with
eserine on September 19'h.'
Brenda completely lost control of herself. She held on to me
and screamed, 'No, no, it isn't true! C harles, tell them! I didn't
do it. I don't know anything about it. Don't let them take me
away. It isn't true, I haven't done anything .. .'
It was a horrible scene. All I could do was try and calm her
down. I told her that I would arrange for a lawyer for her - that
a lawyer would help her with everything.

'Come along, Mrs Leonides,' said Taverner. 'We have to go
,
now.
'Laurence,' she said, staring at Taverner. 'What have you done
to Laurence?'
'Mr Laurence Brown is also under arrest,' said Taverner.
At this news Brenda fell to the ground. The tears fell down
her face as Taverner quietly helped her towards the car. Laurence
Brown came out of the house with a police officer, and they all
got into the car and drove away.
Sophia was pale and upset. 'It's horrible, C harles,' she said.
'You must get her a really good lawyer.' She sighed deeply. 'But
why have they been arrested now?'
I explained that the police had found love letters from Brenda
and Laurence. 'It is horrible, Sophia,' I added, ' but isn't it what
we wanted? You said yourself it would be all right if the right
person had killed your grandfather. Brenda was the right person ,
wasn't she? Brenda or Laurence?'
'Don't say that, Charles, you make me feel awful.'
'But it's true, isn't it? Now things can go back to normal and we can get married. Your family are cleared of suspicion. Of
course, none of you really had a motive.'
Sophia's face suddenly went white. 'Except me, C harles,' she
said. ' I had a motive. I knew about the w ill.'
'What?' I stared at her. I suddenly felt cold.
' I knew that Grandfather had left his money to me. He told
me. H e said I must look after the family when he was gone.'
'Why didn't you tell me? '
'When there was such confusion with the will, I thought
perhaps he'd made a mistake, or changed his mind. I didn't want
him to leave everything to me - I was afraid.'
'Afraid? ' I said . 'Why?'

Agatha C hristie

'Because - because of the murder.'
So Sophia had been afraid that she would be suspected of
murder. I understood now why she had refused to be engaged to
me, and why she desperately wanted to know the truth.
As we walked hack towards the house, I suddenly remembered
something Sophia had said - that she supposed she could murder
someone, but only for something really important.

Chapter 22
Before we reached the house, we met Roger and C lemency.
'Hello, you two,' said Roger. 'I see the police have arrested that
horrible woman and her boyfriend at last. I hope they're both
hanged.'
C lemency frowned. 'Don't be so cruel, Roger,' she said.
'Cruel? ' said Roger 'Rubbish! They poisoned a helpless old
m an! I loved my father, don't you understand? I loved h im.'
' I know, Roger, I know,' said Clemency.
We went towards the house. Roger and Sophia walked ahead
and I walked behind with Clemency. 'The police should let us
leave now,' she told me.
'Do you want to go so soon ?' I asked.
'I'm desperate to go.' I looked at Clemency in surprise. 'Don't
you understand, Charles?' she continued. 'I'm fighting for my
happiness - and Roger's. I don't want Roger to stay here in
England - I want him to come away w ith me. I want him all to
myself, right away from his family.'
I hadn't realized how desperately Clemency loved Roger. I
remembered what Edith de H aviland had said - that she loved
her family, 'but not too much '. Had Edith been thinking of
Clemency?
A car drove up to the front door and Josephine and Magda
got out. Apart from the bandage rou nd her head, Josephine
looked very well. ' I want to look at the fish in the lake,' she said.
'Darling,' said Magda, 'come in and lie down for a while first.
I'll get you some soup.'
' I don't want to lie down,' said Josephine. 'And I hate soup.
I'm quite all right.'

Agatha C hristie

C rooked H ouse

Magda looked doubtful. I knew that Josephine had been kept
safely in hospital until Brenda and Laurence had been arrested.
'I'll look after her,'•I said to Magda, as Josephine went to see the
fish.
When we got there, I asked Josephine if she wanted to hear
about what had happened. 'Do you know that your grandfather
left all his money to Sophia?'
'Mother told me,' Josephine said, sounding bored. 'Anyway, I
knew already. I heard Grandfather tell Sophia.'
'Were you listening at the door again?'
'Yes. I like listening,' saidJosephine. 'I heard what Grandfather
said about me. Nannie doesn't like it when I listen.'
I changed the subject to something I thought would excite
her. 'Chieflnspector Taverner has arrested Brenda and Laurence.'
'Yes, I know,' she said, still bored.
'How can you know? It's only just happened.'
'We passed their car on the road,' she said. 'Brenda and
Laurence were inside, so of course I knew they'd been arrested.'
'I'm sorry,' I said, 'but I had to tell the police about the letters.
I found them in the attic. You could have told them yourself if
you hadn't been knocked out.'
Josephine touched her head carefully. ' I could have been
killed,' she said, sounding pleased. 'I told you it was time for the
second murder. It was stupid to hide those letters in the attic. I
knew Laurence had hidden something there when I saw him
coming out of the attic.'
'But I thought -' I stopped as we heard Edith de Haviland's
voice, calling, 'Josephine, Josephine, come here at once.'
Josephine sighed. ' It's Aunt Edith, so I have to go.' She ran
across the garden, and I followed more slowly. When Josephine

had gone inside, I was left alone with Edith de H aviland. She
looked very tired and old.
Tm glad it's over,' she said to me. 'Do you think Brenda and
Laurence will be found guilty?'
' I don't know,' T admitted. 'I don't know how much evidence
the police have. There are love letters.'
Edith looked very grim. 'I'm not happy about this, C harles. I
don't like Brenda - in fact I dislike her very much. But I feel it's
my responsibility to make sure she's treated fairly.'
'And Laurence?'
'Laurence is a m an,' she said. 'He must look after himself. But
Aristide would never forgive me if-' She didn't finish. Instead
she suggested that we should go in for lunch, and I explained that
I was driving back to London.
'Will you take me with you?' she asked. 'And not tell anyone?'
I was surprised, but I did as she asked.
We didn't speak much on the journey. When I asked her
where I should stop, she said, 'H arley Street.'
H arley Street was where all the best London doctors worked.
I felt uneasy. ' I hope-' I began and stopped.
'That's why I didn't want to tell anyone,' Edith said. 'They' ll
just make a fuss.'
Tm very sorry,' I said.
'Don't worry,' she said. 'I've had a very good life.' She smiled.
'And it's not finished yet.'

Crooked House

Chapter 23
After a quick visit to my father, who was busy, I went out for a
drink with C hieflnspector Taverner. 'Well,' he said, 'the case is
over at last.' But he didn't sound very happy about it.
'Do you think Brenda and Laurence will be found guilty?' I
asked him.
'It's impossible to say,' he replied. 'There's no proof - and no
definite or direct evidence against them. It's the same in a lot of
murder cases.'
'What about the letters?'
'The letters say things like "it won't be long now" but they
never mention poison. They could argue that all they meant was
that Aristide Leonides was so old he was sure to die soon.'
'And what do you think - are they guilty?' I asked.
He looked at me with no expression on his face. ' I don't think
anything, Charles. I've done my duty, and it's been decided to
send them to trial.'
That's how I knew that Taverner wasn't satisfied.
A few days later I talked to my father about the case. Like
Taverner, he said that there was enough evidence against Brenda
and Laurence to send them to trial.
'That's not what I'm talking about,' I said. 'With your
experience, do you think they're guilty?'
'To be honest with you, Charles, I just - don't know! They
could be guilty, but I'm just not sure - and I wish I was.'
We were silent for a while, before my father said, 'So tell
me, Charles, what do you think? Do you think that one of the
Leonides family is the real murderer?'
'Yes, I do,' I finally admitted. 'Because that's what they think
themselves.'
'Do they?' said my father. 'That's very interesting.'

'Only Roger is sure it's Brenda,' I continued. 'The others
don't think so.'
'So who do you think it is?' my father asked quietly. 'Sophia?'
'No! Of course not, no!'
'But you're not completely sure, are you?' said my father.
'Even if you won't admit it. What about the others?'
'I can think ofreasons - though not always good reasons -why
they all could have killed Aristide Leonides,' I said. 'Philip has
always been very jealous of Roger, and he could have poisoned
his father to make sure that Roger's company went bankrupt. I
don't think Magda is involved, and although she suddenly wants
Josephine to go to school in Switzerland, I think it's because she's
afraid that Josephine knows something. And she would never hit
Josephine on the head.'
'Why not, Charles?' said my father. 'Don't you read the news?
Mothers often dislike one or more of their children. Who else is
there? What about Roger?'
'I'm sure that Roger did.n 't kill his father. But his wife might
have done it.' I told him about my conversation with Clemency.
'And Edith,' I continued, 'Edith de Haviland might have
done it, if she had a good reason. But I don't know why.'
'Would she hit the child on the head?'
'No,' I said slowly. 'I don't believe she would. Which reminds
me - Josephine said something that doesn't fit in, but I can't quite
remember what it was .. .'
'You'll remember soon,' said my father. 'Anyone else?'
'Well,' I said, 'it could be Eustace. H e didn't like his
grandfather and he has been behaving very strangely. And he's
the only one who I think could knock out Josephine if she knew
something about him - and she does seem to know everything.
She writes it down in a little book -' I stopped.
'What's the matter?' asked my father.

Agatha Christie

'I've just remembered what Josephine said!' I exclaimed.
'We thought that Josephine's room was searched because of the
letters. But Josephine told me that it was Laurence who hid the
letters in the attic. She saw him and found the letters, but left
them where they were.'
'Well?'
'That means that it wasn't the letters that someone was looking
for in Josephi~e's room. It must have been something else - her
little black book where she writes everything down. IfJosephine
still has that book -' I stood up.
'Then she still isn't safe,' said my father. ' Is that what you were
going to say?'
'Yes,' I said. 'She won't be out of danger until she leaves for
Switzerland.'
' I think you're right about the danger,' said my father. 'You
should go to Three Gables at once.'
'Is it Eustace?' I asked him desperately. 'Clemency?'
'I think the facts point clearly in one direction,' my father said
gently. 'I'm surprised you don't see it yourself. I think -'
At that moment a police officer knocked on the door. 'I know
you asked not to be disturbed, sir, but Miss Leonides is on the
telephone. She says it's urgent.'
I quickly picked up the telephone, and heard Sophia's voice
say desperately, 'Charles, it isn't over. The murderer is still here.'
'What's wrong, Soph ia? ls it - Josephine?'
'It's not Josephine,' said Sophia. 'It's Nannie. Josephine didn't
drink her cocoa, and left it o n a table. Nannie didn't want to
waste it, so she drank it.'
'Poor Nannie. Is she very ill?',
'Oh , Charles,' said Sophia. 'She's dead.'

Chapter 24
It was like a terrible dream.
Taverner and I drove back quickly to Swinly Dean, just .as
we had before. On the journey I kept saying to myself that it
hadn't been Brenda and Laurence. They had fallen in love w ith
each other and written romantic letters, but they hadn't poisoned
Aristide Leonides - or Nannie.
As we went through the front door I saw a big pile ofluggage
in the hall. Clemency came down the stairs. 'You're just in time
to say goodbye, Charles,' she said. 'We're leaving tonight.'
'But surely you can't go now?' I said with surprise. 'Nannie
is dead.'
'Nannie's death has nothing to do with us,' said Clemency.
'Roger and I were upstairs packing, and we didn't come down at
all whenJosephine's cocoa was on the hall table.'
'Can you prove that?' I said.
'Roger and I are going away,' said Clemency angrily. 'Why
would we want to poison Nannie?'
'You might not have meant to poison Nannie.'
'We wouldn't poison Josephine, either.'
'But Josephine knows a lot about people,' I said. 'She -'
I stopped as Josephine herself appeared, eating an apple. Her
eyes shone w ith excitement. 'Nannie's been poisoned,' she said.
'Just like Grandfather. It's very exciting, isn't it? '
'Aren't you upset about it?' I demanded. 'Didn't you like Nannie?'
'Not really. She was always telling me not to do things.'
'Do you like anybody, Josephine?' asked C lem ency.
' I love Aunt Edith,' ·Josephine said. 'I love her very much.
And I could love Eustace if he let m e, but he's so horrible to me.
I won't tell him what I've found out - that now I know.'

Agatha Christie

Crooked House

There was a moment's silence. Josephine stared at Clemency.
I heard a noise from behind one of the doors, but when I opened
it there was no one there.
I felt uneasy. As Edith de Haviland came down the stairs, I
took hold of Josephine's arm and led her firmly into an empty
room. I made her sit down in a chair while I sat opposite her.
'Now, Josephine,' I said, 'we're going to have a talk. What
exactly do you know? Do you know who poisoned your cocoa?'
Josephine nodded.
'And you know who poisoned your grandfather?'
Josephine nodded again.
'And who knocked you on the head?'
Again Josephine nodded.
'Then you're going to tell me everything - now - and then
we'll tell the police.'
' I won't,' said Josephine. 'I won't tell the police anything.
They're stupid. They thought Brenda and Laurence did it. I
didn't think so. So I made a test - and now I know I'm right.'
She sounded very pleased with hersel(
I tried hard to be patient. 'I know you're very clever,
Josephine,' - she looked pleased - 'but don't you realize that
you're in danger?'
'Of course I am,' said .Josephine. 'In some books lots of people
are killed.'
'This isn't a detective story - this is real life! You must tell me
what you know.'
'You don't understand,' said Josephine. 'I might not want to
tell. I might - be fond of the person.'
She paused. 'And ifI do tell,' she continued, 'I'll do it properly,
with everybody sitting together. I'll talk about all the clues, and
then say suddenly, "It was you!"'

She pointed her finger just as Edith de Haviland entered the
room.
'Josephine, throw that apple away,' said Edith, 'and wash your
hands. I'm taking you out in the car.' She looked at me. 'It's safer
out of the house. We'll go and get an ice cream.'
Josephine looked pleased. 'Can I have two?'
'Perhaps,' said Edith. 'Now go and get your coat, it's cold
outside today. Charles, can you go with her? I must quickly
write a few letters.'
She sat down at the desk, and I went upstairs with Josephine.
Sophia came into the room, looking pale and nervous, as
Josephine was getting ready. 'Charles,' she said with surprise. 'I
didn't know you were here -'
'I'm going out with Aunt Edith,' said Josephine importantly.
'We're going to have ice creams.'
Sophia frowned as we went back downstairs to find Edith,
who was just putting her two letters into envelopes. 'It's quite a
nice day,' said Edith. 'Cold but clear.'
She was silent for a moment, looking down at the letters in
her hand, and then she turned and kissed Sophia. 'Goodbye,
dear,' Edith said. 'Don't worry too much. Some things just have
to be accepted.'
She and Josephine got into the car and waved to us as they
drove off
' I suppose it's better to keep Josephine away for a while,' I
said. 'But she must tell us what she knows.'
'She probably doesn't know anything,' Sophia said. 'She's just
showing off and making herself look important.'
'I think it's more than that,' I said. 'Do they know yet what
poison was in the cocoa?'

Agatha Christie

'They think it's Aunt Edith's heart medicine. There was a
bottle full of pills, but now it's empty.'
'Isn't the medicine kept locked up?'
'Yes,' replied Sophia, ' but the key is quite easy to find.'
'But who was it?' I said. 'What do you think, Sophia?'
'I don't know,' she whispered. 'It's like a bad dream . Come
outside with me, Charles. It's safer outside. I'm afraid to stay in
this house.'

Chapter 25
We stayed outside in the garden for a long time. We didn't talk
about the murders. Instead Sophia talked fondly about Nannie the games they had played with her and the stories she had told
them. I think this made Sophia feel better.
I wondered w hat Taverner was doing. More policemen had
arrived, and Nannie's body had been taken away.
At last it was almost da rk. 'We should go inside,' said Sophia
w ith a shiver. 'Aunt Edith and Josephine haven't come back yet.
Surely they should be back by now?'
I felt uneasy - what had h appened to them?
We went inside and had tea w ith Magda. Philip stayed in
the library. Magda didn't speak much, except to ask, 'Where are
Edith and Josephine? They're out very late.'
I felt even more uneasy, so I went to speak to Taverner. 'The
police will let us know if there's any news,' I told Sophia, who
was alone in the room when I got back.
Tm worried, C harles,' she said. 'Something must have
happened.'
'It's not really late yet.'
'She kissed me goodbye .. .' said Sophia, with a strange
expression on her face .
I didn't understand what she meant. We sat there for a w hile,
pretendi ng to read.
It was half-past six when Taverner opened the door, and his
serious face warned us that something was wrong. Tm sorry,' he
said. 'I have bad news. We found Edith de H aviland's car at the
bottom of the nearby stone quarry. Both people inside are dead killed immediately.'

Agatha Christie

'Josephine!' Magda was standing at the door. Her voice rose
as she cried, 'Josephine - my baby!' Sophia put her arms round
her mother.
'W ait a moment,' I said, as I remembered something. Edith
de Haviland had not been carrying any letters when she got into
the car. I ran out to the hall and found the letters on the table half-hidden behind a vase.
The first letter was addressed to Chief Inspector Taverner,
and I stood beside him as he read it.

When you read this letter I expect I will be dead. I wish to accept
full responsibility for the deaths of Nannie and my brother-in-law,
Aristide Leonides. I swear that Brenda Leonides and Laurence
Brown are innocent. Dr Chavasse, ef 783 Harley Street, will confirm
that, I have only a few more months to live. I prefer to end my life in
this way and save two innocent people from being sent for trial for a
murder they did not commit.
Edith de Haviland
Sophia, too, read the letter. '.Aunt Edith,' she w hispered. 'But
why Josephine? Why did she take Josephine w ith her?'
Then - at last - I saw everything clearly. I realized that I was
still holding Edith's second letter in my hand. It was addressed to
me. I tore the envelope open and Josephine's little black notebook
fell out. I opened it and saw the writing on the first page.
'We were wrong, Charles, weren't we?' Sophia whispered.
'Aunt Edith didn't do it.'
'No,' I said, 'she didn't.'
'It was - Josephine - wasn't it? It was Josephine.'
Together we looked down at the first page in the little black
notebook.
'Today I killed Gramlfather.'

Chapter 26
Afterwards I wondered how I could have been so blind. The
truth was so obvious. Josephine, and only Josephine, was vain
and self important. She had loved to talk about the murder, and
about how clever she was - and how stupid the police were.
Because she was a child, I had never thought that Josephine
could be the murderer. But both murders could easily have been
committed by a child. In fact her grandfather himself had told
J oseph ine exactly what to do. And she read so many detective
stories that she would know about fingerprints.
She had attacked herself, not really realizing that she could
have been killed. There was a clue - the mud on the seat of the
old chair. Josephine was the only person who would need to climb
up on a chair to balance the heavy stone door- stop on the top of
the door. Obviously it had missed her a few times - the marks in
the floor showed that - but she had tried again, using her scarf so
she didn't leave any fingerprints. Finally the doorstop had hit her.
We had all thought that Josephine was in danger, just as she
wanted. She 'knew something' - she had been attacked!
I realized how she had carefully shown me - on purpose where the attic was, so I found the letters. And she had made the
mess in her room herself
But when she came back from hospital, Josephine was
unhappy. The case was over, Brenda and Laurence had been
arrested and she herself wasn't getting much attention. So she
stole Edith de Haviland's heart medicine, poisoned her own
cocoa and left the cup on the hall table.
Did she know that Nannie would drink it? Possibly. Did
Nannie, with a lifetime of experience with children, suspect
Josephine?

Agatha Christie

C rooked House

And Edith - had she suspected too? Or had she known? I
looked down at the letter in my hand.

Her last words were, 'I hate Nannie, I hate her! She says I am
only a little girl. She says I show eff. She's making Mother send me
away. I'm going to kill her, too - I think Aunt Edith's medicine will do
it. 1J there is another murder, then the police will come back and it will
all be exciting again.
'Nannie's dead. I'm glad. I haven't decided yet where I'll hide the
bottle with the pills. Perhaps in Aunt Clemency's room - or in Eustace's
room. When I am dead I shall leave this notebook behind for the Chief
of Police and they will see what a great criminal I was.'

Dear Charles
This letter isjustfor you, and for Sophia if you want to show it to her.
I want someone to know the truth. I found Josephine's little notebook
hidden in the garden. It confirms what I already suspected. I don't
know if what I'm doing is right or wrong, but my life is nearly over,
and I don't want Josephine to suffer for what she has done. 1J I am
wrong, I hope I can be forgiven - I did it out of love. Bless you both.
Edith de Haviland
I gave the letter to Sophia, and when she had read it, we
opened Josephine's little black notebook.

'Today I killed Granclfather.'
As we turned the pages, we saw Josephine's horribly childish
motives for murder. H ere are the important entries.

'Grandfather wouldn't let me do ballet dancing so I made up my
mind I would kill him. Then we should go to London to live and Mother
wouldn't mind me doing ballet.
'I don't want to go to Switzerland - I won't go. 1J Mother makes me
I will kill her too - if I can get some poison.
'Eustace made me very angry today. He says I am only a girl and that
my detecting is silly. He wouldn't think I was silly if he knew it was me
who did the murder.
'I like Charles - but he is rather stupid. I have not decided yet who I
shall say has done the murder. Perhaps Brenda and Laurence - Brenda
is horrible to me, but I like Laurence.'

I closed the book. Sophia was crying. 'Oh, Charles - it's so
awful. She's such a monster - but I also feel so much pity for her.'
I felt the same. I had liked Josephine, but she had been born
with something wrong with her - she was the crooked child of
the little Crooked House.
'What would have happened to her,' Sophia asked me, 'if she
had lived?'
' I don't know,' I said. 'Perhaps she would have been sent to a
special school - or a child's prison? '
' It's better this way,' Sophia said with a shiver. 'But I don't like
Aunt Edith taking the blame.'
'It was her decision,' I said. ' I don't suppose anyone will find
out. Brenda and Laurence will be free to go and there won't be
a trial.
'And you , Sophia,' I added, holding her hands, 'will marry
me. We'll go away together and you won't have to think about
your family for a while. You can think about me instead.'
'Aren't you afraid to marry me, C harles? ' said Sophia, looking
straight into my eyes.
'Not at all,' I said. 'Why should I be? Poor little Josephine
inherited all the worst from your families. But you, Sophia,

Agacha Chriscie

have inherited the best. Your grandfather thought so and he, my
darling, was always right.'
'I love you, Charles,' said Sophia. 'And I will marry you.' She
looked down at the notebook. 'Poor Josephine.'
'Poor Josephine,'. I said.

***
'What really happened, Charles?' my father asked me.
I never lie to my father. 'It wasn't Edith de H aviland,' I told
him. ' It was Josephine.'
My father nodded his head gently. 'Yes,' he said . 'I thought it
was. Poor child . . .'

CHARACTER LIST

Charles Hayward: a young man who wants to marry Sophia Leonides.

He tells the story.
Sophia Leonides: the granddaughter of Aristide Leonides, and the

eldest child of Philip and Magda
Aristide Leonides: a very rich - and old - businessman who is the father

of Roger and Philip, and grandfather of Sophia, Eustace and Josephine
Mr Hayward: Charles' father, the Assistant Commissioner of Scotland

Yard, London's police headquarters
Chief Inspector Taverner: the police officer in charge of the murder case
Edith de Haviland: the sister of the first Mrs Leonides, the aunt of Roger

and Philip and the great-aunt of Sophia, Eustace and Josephine
Philip (Phil) Leonides: the seco~d son of Aristide Leonides, who is

married to Magda, and is the father of Sophia, Eustace and Josephine
Magda Leonides: an actress, who is married to Philip and is the mother

of Sophia, Eustace and Josephine
Roger Leonides: the eldest son of Aristide Leonides, who is married to

Clemency
Clemency Leonides: a scientist, who is married to Roger
Brenda Leonides: the second, much younger wife of Aristide Leonides
Laurence Brown: the young man who teaches Eustace and Josephine
Eustace Leonides: the son of Philip and Magda, and grandson of Aristide
Josephine Leonides: the second daughter of Philip and Magda, and

granddaughter of Aristide
Mr Gaitskill: Aristide Leonides' lawyer
Nannie: the Leonides' family servant

Cultural notes

CULTURAL NOTES

World War II

The story begins during World War II (1939-1945) in Cairo. The 'Allies'
(which included the UK, the Soviet Union, the USA, and China) were
fighting the 'Axis powers' (which included Germany, Italy, and Japan) for
control of North Africa. Sophia and Charles are working for the British

Deaths column in newspapers

Daily newspapers were very important in the UK. People often read a
national newspaper in the morning at breakfast, and then a local
newspaper in the evening. Besides official news, there were many other
short sections, called 'columns': for society and entertainment news, for
selling and buying things, etc. When a new baby was born, a couple got
married, or a person died, their family announced the news in the Births,
Marriages, or Deaths columns.

Government in Egypt when they meet.
Scotland Yard and the police

During the war, many people had to leave home to fight or work, like

Scotland Yard is the headquarters - the main building - of the Greater

Charles and Sophia. It was a time when people could make new and

London Police. Small, local crimes in and around London are the
responsibility of local police stations (where Chief Inspector Taverner
works), but in difficult or important cases, police officers from Scotland
Yard with more experience and more power (like Charles' father) help the
local police. Scotland Yard is very famou s in UK detective stories. The
headquarters is still in London, but has now moved to a new site and is

unexpected friendships or fall in love. However, they then often had to
move to other places and could not contact their friends for months or
years. This is why Charles did not want to make marriage plans at the
beginning of the story.
Many large cities in the UK, especially London, were attacked by
aeroplanes and bombs. These attacks destroyed a lot of buildings and
killed many people across the country. Philip Leonides' family went to live
with Aristide Leonides because he had a large house, and it was outside

called 'New Scotland Yard'.
Inquests

of London in the suburbs, so there was less danger from bombs.

When the police investigate a sudden, violent or suspicious death (such
as Aristide Leonides' unexpected death), they often hold a public

Telegrams

investigation called an inquest to find out why the person died.

In the 1940s, the quickest way to send an urgent message was by
telegram. Because the sender had to pay for each word, people only

At the inquest, a group of people hears medical evide nce, as well as
evidence from any other people that may be useful. The fami ly of the

wrote the most important words, which makes the style of telegrams
very different from ordinary English.

person who died and me mbers of the public ca n also go to the inquest
to watch.
If the inquest shows that the death was actually a murder, then the
police can investigate, arrest and question any suspects. If the police
decide that there is enough evidence against a suspect, then this

Cultural notes

Cultural notes

person is officially sent for trial in a court to decide if they are guilty
or innocent.
At the time of this story, when a trial proved that someone was guilty of
murder, this person could be punished by hanging. A rope was tied round
the person's neck, and the support was taken away from under their feet,
killing the person. The last hanging for murder in the UK took place in
1964, and this punishment was officially stopped later.
Inheritance

When the story was written, if a man died without a will, all his money and
property would usually go to his wife. If someone wanted to change this,
and control what other people inherited, they had to write a will. This
document must be signed by two people who have no connection with
the money or property in the will - in t_his story, Aristide Leonides asks
two of the servants in the house to sign the will to make it legal.
Because the law can be complicated and difficult, people often use a
lawyer to help them write a will, but even if the will is not checked by a
lawyer, it is still legal as long as two witnesses have signed it.
Bankruptcy

If a company has a lot of problems and finally does not have enough
money to pay its debts, it needs to use the 'bankruptcy laws' to protect
itself and the people it needs to pay.
Bankruptcy laws control how much money a company must pay, and who
should receive the money. In many countries now, people consider that
bankruptcy is a normal part of the economy, though it has serious
consequences for the people involved. When this story was written,
however, bankruptcy was still a terrible scandal or shame, not only for
the person who was bankrupt, but also for their whole family.

Aristide Leonides' house

Aristide Leonides was a successful businessman with enough money to
design and build his own house. When Aristide built his house, he wanted
it to look like a traditional little English house. Unfortunately, he built a
very large house so although it had traditional English features, it looked
very strange to English eyes.
Nursery rhymes

Traditional nursery rhymes, like the one this story begins with, are said by
almost every child in the UK when they are growing up. They are a kind
of poem, and many of them are actually very old - sometimes hundreds
of years old - but usually people have forgotten the original meaning.
Children enjoy them because they are fun, simple and comforting. When
you hear them again as an adult, however, sometimes you realize that
some of them are very strange, perhaps even a little frightening. The
story of Aristide Leonides and his family certainly makes you think about
the 'crooked man' nursery rhyme in a different way.
Diabetes and injections

An important part of the story is that Aristide Leonides needs to have
injections of insulin. This is because he has diabetes, which means that
his body cannot control the amount of sugar in his blood. If there is too
much sugar, it damages the body, and can even kill. Insulin can control
how much sugar there is, but you must inject it directly into the blood,
and you must do it regularly - many people have to inject themselves
once a day or more.

Glossary

GLOSSARY

anxious (adj)

nervous or worried about something
Key

n =noun

arrest (v)

v = verb
phr v = phrasal verb

when the police take you to a police station because' they believe you
may have committed a crime

v phr = verb phrase
adj = adjective
adv =adverb
excl = exclamation
exp = expression

arrogant (adj)

when someone behaves in a proud, unpleasant way toward other people
because they believe that they are more important than others
ashamed (adj)

when you feel embarrassed or guilty because of someone or something
abrupt (adj)

sudden; rude and unfriendly

Assistant Commissioner (n)

an important official in the police
act (n)
one of the main parts into which a play is divided

astonished (adj)

very surprised
admire (v)

to like and respect someone or something

attic (n)

a room at the top of a house just below the roof
affair (n)

a love affair is when a married man or woman has a relationship with
someone who is not their wife or husband; an event or situation, when
you are talking about it in a general way
alibi (n)

proof that you were somewhere else when a crime was committed
amused (adj)

if you are amused by something, it makes you want to laugh or smile

awkward (adj)

embarrassing and difficult to deal with; uncomforta ble or clumsy
background (n)

the kind of fami ly you come from, and the kind of education you have
had
bankrupt (adj)
when people or organizations do not have enough money to pay their
debts (see Cultural notes)

.......
Glossary

Glossary

bindweed (n)

chin (n)

a wild plant that winds itself around other plants and makes it difficult for

the part of your face that is below your mouth and above your neck

them to grow

clap (v)

blame (v)
to believe or say that someone is responsible for something or that they

to hit your hands together to express appreciation (at the end of a show,
for example) or attract attention

caused it

class (n)

blind (adj)
if you are blind to a fact or a situation, you ignore it or are unaware of it
bombing (n)
the act of attacking a place with bombs, in order to damage or destroy a
large area
booby trap ( n)
something which is hidden or disguised so that it will hurt or injure
someone if they accidentally touch it

the division of people in a society into groups according to their social
status (upper, middle, lower or working class, for example). This division
was very important in the UK at the time of this story.
clue (n)
something that helps you to find the answer to a problem, mystery, or
puzzle
clumsily (adv)
to move or handle things in a careless, awkward way
commit (v)

bump into (v)
if you bump into something or someone, you accidentally hit them while

if someone commits a crime, they do something illegal; if they commit a
murder, they kill someone

you are moving

concussion (n)

burst open (v phr)

when you lose consciousness or feel sick or confused after an injury
to your head

to open suddenly

corridor (n)
businesslike (adj)
when you deal with things in an efficient way without wasting time

a long passage in a building, with doors and rooms on one or both sides
courage (n)

capable (adj)
able to do something

dangerous, even though they may be afraid

case (n)

court (n)

a crime or mystery that the police are investigating

a place where legal matters are decided by a judge and jury

the quality shown by someone who does something difficult or

Glossary

Glossar y

drawing room (n)
a room in a large house where people sit and relax, and entertain guests

credit (n)
if you are given credit for goods or services, you are allowed to pay for
them some time after you have received them

dressing gown (n)
a long piece of clothing, like a coat, that you wear in the house to relax
or before you get dressed

crooked (adj)
if you describe something as crooked, especially something that is usually
straight, you mean that it is twisted, not straight; if you describe a person
or an activity as crooked, you mean that they are dishonest or criminal

dull (adj)
boring, not bright or lively

death certificate ( n)
an official document, usually written by a doctor, to explain where, when

eagerly (adj)
in a way which shows that you want to do something very much

and why a person has died. UK law says that a death certificate must be
written for anyone that dies there.

emotional (adj)
when people show t heir feelings very openly, especially because they

determined (adj)
when you have made a firm decision to do something and will not let

are upset

anything stop you

engaged (adj)
when two people have agreed to marry each other

devotion (n)
when a person loves another person very much
diabetes (n)
a medical condition in which someone has too much sugar in their blood
(see Cultural notes)
dignity (n)
a person has dignity when they are serious, calm, and controlled, and
other people respect them because of this
disturb (v)
to make someone feel upset or worried; to interrupt someone
door-stop (n)
something heavy that people put in front of a door to keep it open (to
stop it closing)

i

eserine (n)
a very strong medicine which can be dangerous or even kill you if you

1.

take too much
evidence (n)
information from documents, objects, or witnesses which is used in a
court of law to try to prove something
exit line (n)
an actor's lines are t he words they speak in a play or movie. Exit lines are
the words they speak just before they leave the play (usually very clever
or very sad words).
extraordinary (adj)
something very unusual or surprising

Glossary

eyedrops (n)
a kind of medicine: a liquid that you put directly into your eye
fairy story (n)
a story for young children
father-in-law (n)
the father of your husband or wife
finance (v)
to provide the money to pay for a project
financial position (n)
the amount of money that you have and how well it is organized
fingerprints (n)
marks made by a person's fingers which show the lines on the skin. Everyone's
fingerprints are different, so they can be used to identify criminals.
fond of (adj)
when you like someone very much
fool (v)
to make someone believe something that is not true, usually in order to
get some adva ntage for yourself
forehead (n)
the part of your face between your eyes a nd your hair

Glossary

gain (v)
if you gain something, you obtain it, and usually you get some advantage
from it
get rid of (v phr)
when you get rid of something that you do not want or do not like, you
take action so that you no longer have it
give (someone) the sack (exp)
when your emp loyer or boss tells you that you can no longer work for
them
grimly (adv)
the way in which you do something unpleasant, d epressing, and difficult
to accept
grind [ground) (v)
to crush something until it becomes a fine powder
guilty (adj)
if someone is guilty of a crime or offence, they have committed that
crime or offence
hang (v)
to kill someone by tying a rope around their neck and taking the support
away from under their feet

frown (n)
when you move your eyebrows together because you are annoyed,
worried, or t hinking

headquarters (n)
t he main offices of an organization

gable (n)
in a traditional English house, this is the triangular end wall under the

hedge (n)
a row of bushes or small t rees, usually along the edge of a lawn, garden,

roof (see Cultural notes)

field, or road

Glossary

Glossary

hug (v)

interrupt (v)

to put your arms around someone and hold them tightly, for example
because you like them or are pleased to see them

to say or do somethi~g that stops someone who is speaking
ironically (adv)

humiliated (adj)
when someone feels ashamed or stupid

when you say something ironically, you say the opposite of what you
really mean, as a joke

hush (v)

knitting (n)

if you hush someone or if they hush, they stop speaking or making a noise

when you make something, especially an article of clothing, from wool
using two long needles

in charge of (exp)
responsible for someone or something

knock out (phr v)
to hit someone and make them unconscious

in common (exp)
if people or things have something in common, they have the same
characteristics, features, or intere!!ts

luxurious (adj)
in very great comfort, especially among beautiful and expensive
surroundings

inherit (v)
to receive money or property from someone who has died

make a fuss (v phr)

injection (n)

to worry or behave in a nervous, anxious way about unimportant matters
or rush around doing unnecessary things

when you put a medicine or drug into your body using a device with a
needle called a syringe
inquest (n)
a meeting where evidence is heard about someone's death to find out
why they died
in sight (exp)
if something is in sight, you can see it
insulin (n)
something that most people make naturally in their body and that
controls how much sugar there is in their blood (see Cultural notes)

make a scene (v phr)
if you make a scene, you embarrass people by publicly showi ng your
anger about something
make up (phr v)
to pretend that something is true when in fact it is not
means (n, sing & plural)
a method, instrument, or process which can be used to do something
mess (n)
something that is not neat

Glossary

Glossary

motive (n)

pregnant (adj)

the reason for doing something

if a woman is pregnant, she has a baby developing in her body

mud (n)

a sticky mixture of earth and water
murmur (v)

to say something softly, so that it can hardly be heard
My goodness! ( exc!)

something that people say when they are surprised
nursery rhyme (n)

a poem or song for young children, especially one that is old or well
known (see Cultural notes)

pretend (v)

to try to make people believe that something is true, although in fact it
is not
produce (v)

if someone produces something such as a movie, a magazine, or a CD,
they organize it and decide how it should be made
property ( n)

all the things that belong to a person
quarry (n)

a very large hole that people dig in a piece of land in order to get stone
or minerals

overhear (v)

to hear what someone is saying when they are not talking to you and

reference (n)

they do not know that you are listening

a letter written by someone who knows you well, which describes your
character and abilities, usually to help you get a job

pass away (phr v)
respectable (adj)

you can say that someone passed away to mean that they died, if you
want to avoid using_the word 'die' because you think it might upset

when society approves of somebody, and believes that their behaviour is

people

right and good

pity (n)

ruthless (adj)

a feeling of sadness or sympathy for someone

if you say that someone is ruthless, you mean that you disapprove of
them because they are very harsh or cruel, and will do anything that is

play tricks with (v phr)

necessary to achieve what they want

to handle something in a clever way, often in order to deceive someone
scene (n)
poison (v)

part of a play in which a series of events happens in the same place; you

to give someone something which will harm or kill them when it is
swallowed or absorbed

refer to a place as a scene when you are describing its appearance and
explaining how it makes you feel

G lossary

Glossary

secretive (adj)
when someone likes to have secrets and to keep their knowledge, feelings,
or plans hidden
self important (adj)
when you think you are more important than you really are
sensitive (adj)
when you show that you can see and understand other people's needs,
problems, or feelings
servant (n)
someone who is employed to work at another person's home, for
example, as a cleaner or a gardener
shiver (v)
when your body shakes slightly because you are cold or frightened
show off (phr v)
to try to make people think you are very clever by showing in a very
obvious way what you can do
·

slyly (adv)
to do something in a way that shows that you know something that other
people do not know
snap (v)
to break suddenly, usually with a sharp cracking noise
sneak (v)
if you sneak around, you go somewhere very quietly on foot, so that
people d on't see or hear you
soppy (adj)
when someone shows pity or love so much that it seems foolish or
e mbarrassing
sort out (phr v)
to organize
spy (v)
to watch someone secretly
stab (v)
to push a knife or sharp object into someone's body

shrug your shoulders (v phr)
when you raise your shoulders to show that you are not interested in
something or that you do not know or care about something

step-grandmother (n)
the woman who has married your grandfather after the death or divorce
of your grandmother

sick of (adj)
if you a re sick of something, you are very annoyed by it and want it to
stop

stepmother ( n)
the woman who has ma rried your father after the death or divorce of
your mother

sixpence (n)
a small coin made of silver; used in England from 1551 until 1980. People
also thought that it could bring you good luck.

stiff (adj)
if you become stiff, you stop moving and become very tense, for example
because you are afraid or angry

Glossary

G lossary

stiffly (adv)

tap (n)

in a rather formal, unfriendly or not relaxed way

something that controls the flow of water etc. from a pipe or container:
Sinks and baths have taps on them.

stile (n)
a set of wood or stone steps to help you climb over a wall (usually in the
countryside)

telegram (n)

a message that is sent by wire and/ or radio and then printed and
delivered to someone (see Cultural notes)

strangle (v)

to kill someone by squeezing their throat tightly so that they are unable
to breathe
suspect (n)

a person who the police think may be guilty of a crime
suspect (v)

timber (n)

a large piece of wood that is used for building houses
trap (n)

something for catching animals; also a plan to catch a criminal
trial (n)

to believe that something dishonest or unpleasant has been done

a formal meeting in a court of law, where a judge and jury listen to
evidence and decide whether a person is guilty of a crime

suspiciously (adv)

twig (n)

to do something in a way that makes other people think that you are
involved in a crime or a dishonest activity

a very small, thin branch that grows out from a main branch of a tree or bush
twist (v)

swear (v)

to move into an unusual, uncomfortable, or bent position

to promise in a serious way that you are telling the truth about
something

twitch (v)

switch (v)
if you switch two things, you replace one with the other

vain (adj)

syringe (n)

to make a little jumping movement

when someone is too proud of their own beauty, intelligence, or other
good qualities

a small tube with a thin hollow needle at the end. Syringes are used for
injecting drugs or for taking blood from your body.

viciously (adv)

tangle (v)

victim (n)

to become twisted and mixed together in a messy way

someone who has been hurt or killed

in a violent and cruel way

Glossary

Collins
weed (n)
a wild plant that grows in gardens or fields of crops and stops the plants
that you want from growing properly

English Readers
OTHER TITLES IN THE AGATHA CHRISTIE SERIES

will (n)
a document where you say what you want to happen to your money and
property when you die

Sparkling Cyanide

witness (n)
a person who sees an event, an accident or crime

Six people sit down for dinner at a table laid for seven. No one can forget
the night exactly a year ago that Rosemary Barton died at this same
table surrounded by the same people, her beautiful face turned blue with
cyanide poison.

yard (n)
a unit of length equal to thirty-six inches or about one metre; a piece of
land next to a house, with grass and plants growing in it

Rosemary had always been memorable - and people had strong reactions
to her. Did one of the six people at dinner feel strongly enough about her
to kill her?

After the Funeral
After Richard Abernethie's funeral, his will is read out to his family. His
sister; Cora, shocks everyone by saying 'He was murdered, wasn't he?'
When Cora is murdered in her bed the very next day, her extraordinary
remark suddenly seems very important.
Every member of the Abernethie family has something to gain from both
murders. The famous Belgian detective Hercule Poirot arrives to solve
the mystery.

COLLINS ENGLISH READERS

THE AGATHA CHRISTIE SERIES
The Mysterious Affair at Styles
The Man in the Brown Suit
The Murder of Roger Ackroyd
The Murder at the Vicarage
Peril at End House
Why Didn't They Ask Evans?
Death in the Clouds
Appointment with Death
N orM?
The Moving Finger
Sparkling Cyanide
Crooked House
They Came to Baghdad
They Do It With Mirrors
A Pocket Full of Rye
After the Funeral
Destination Unknown
Hickory Dickory Dock
4.50 From Paddington
Cat Among the Pigeons

Visit www.collinselt.com/agathachristie for language
activities and teacher's notes based on this story.

